Drug interaction risk between cardioprotective drugs and drugs used
in treatment of COVID-19: A evidence-based review from sixdatabases
Shini Rubina S K, Pharm.Da, Anuba P A, Pharm.Da, Swetha B, Pharm.Da,
Kavya Priya kalala, Pharm.Da, Aishwarya PM, MDb, Sarvesh Sabarathinam, Ph.Da,*
aDepartment of Pharmacy Practice, SRM College of Pharmacy, SRM IST, Kattankulathur, 603203, Kancheepuram, Tamil Nadu, India
bSree Balaji Medical College and Hospital, Chennai, Tamil Nadu, 600044, India
article info
Article history:
Received 31 January 2022Received in revised form2 March 2022Accepted 4 March 2022
Keywords:
COVID-19COVID- 19 treatmentComorbidityPolypharmacy
Drug-drug interactionabstract
Background and aims: This Review discusses the potential drug interactions risk between Drugs used in
treating COVID-19 infection and Drugs used in treating comorbid conditions (Diabetes, hypertension,cardiovascular illness).
Method: Six Databases were consulted a) Micromedex drug interaction b) Medicine complete.com c)
Liverpool Drug Interaction Group for COVID-19 therapies d) Epocrates e) Medscape f) drugs.com .T o
acquire information on possible interaction effects between drugs used for COVID-19 treatment such as
atazanavir, lopinavir/ritonavir, remdesivir, molnupiravir, paxlovid(nirmatrelvir/ritonavir), dexametha-
sone, azithromycin, chloroquine, and FDA approved monoclonal antibodies with primarily used antidi-abetic drugs, antihypertensive drugs, and drugs acting on the cardiovascular system.Results: Potential interaction effects such as worsening glycemic control were prominent with lopinavir/
ritonavir and the primarily used antidiabetic drugs, which needs dosage adjustment and close moni-
toring. The risk of hypotension and irregular heart rhythm is the potential interaction effects withconcomitant use of drugs for COVID-19 treatment and antihypertensive drugs. Caution is advised with
drugs such as atazanavir and lopinavir/ritonavir when concomitantly used in treating comorbid condi-
tions. Drugs such as remdesivir, molnupiravir, and some monoclonal antibodies are safer in use withdrugs used in treating the comorbid condition.
Conclusions: Drug-drug interaction remains one of the signi ﬁcant factors in altering the therapeutic
efﬁcacy. Drugs used to manage comorbid conditions may in ﬂuence the COVID-19 treatment with po-
tential interaction effects. These enhance the view on safety concerns about the drug interaction risk inmanaging COVID-19 infection in patients with comorbid conditions. This primary evidence may concern
preventing potential or unintentional effects resulting from Drug-drug interaction, Improving patient
quality of life.
©2022 Diabetes India. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
1. Introduction
Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) is a contagious disease
triggered by severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2
strain (Sars cov-2), which constitutes the pandemic of the century
[1,2]. The number of people affected by COVID-19 infectionworldwide is over 32 million and rapidly increasing, emphasizing
the importance of symptom management and treatment knowl-
edge for general practitioners and other clinicians [ 3]. COVID-19
infection targets the lungs primarily, causing interstitial pneumo-
nitis and intense ARDS (acute respiratory distress syndrome) [ 4].
With increasing age, comorbidities, and underlying conditions, the
intensity of the infection and fatality get increases [ 5]. Patients over
60 years of age with a medical history, such as cardiovascular dis-
ease, are at the highest risk of developing severe disease as a result
of COVID-19 [ 6]. Under FDA-issued emergency use authorization,
antiviral pharmaceuticals (e.g., Remdesivir), anti-in ﬂammatory*Corresponding author. Department of Pharmacy Practice, S.R.M. College of
Pharmacy, SRM Institute of Science and Technology, SRM Nagar, Kattankulathur,603 203, Kancheepuram, Tamil Nadu, India.
E-mail address: sarveshtvg@gmail.com (S. Sabarathinam).
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Diabetes &Metabolic Syndrome: Clinical Research &Reviews
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/dsx
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.dsx.2022.102451
1871-4021/ ©2022 Diabetes India. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.Diabetes &Metabolic Syndrome: Clinical Research &Reviews 16 (2022) 102451medications, anti-SARS-CoV-2 monoclonal antibodies, and immu-
nomodulatory therapy are accessible as an option for pharmaco-
logical management [ 7,8]. Treatment of complex diseases
frequently necessitates the use of multiple drugs simultaneously.
Polypharmacy raises the risk of drug-drug interaction and reduces
patient compliance. Drug combination therapy can be very effec-
tive, but it is also associated with drug-drug interactions. COVID-19
Patients with underlying diseases are more likely to have drug in-
teractions as they frequently require multiple medications. Drug
interactions may put the patient at risk of severe adverse effects
and reduce treatment safety and ef ﬁcacy. Therefore, there must be
a signi ﬁcant concern in managing their conditions. This Review
discusses the potential interaction effects between the drugs used
in COVID-19 treatment and drugs primarily used for cardiovascular
and comorbid conditions such as diabetes and hypertension.
2. Drugs used in treatment of COVID 19 infections
Developing research and clinical data on the virologic SARS-
CoV-2 suggest a possible list of repurposed drugs with suitable
pharmacological effects and therapeutic ef ﬁcacies in managing
COVID-19 patients. Antiviral drugs such as atazanavir, lopinavir/
ritonavir, and remdesivir are signi ﬁcant in treating the COVID-19
infection [ 9]. Atazanavir inhibits the protease activity of SARS-
Cov-2 which results in inhibition of viral replication. Viral replica-
tion is also hampered by the drug lopinavir/ritonavir by its action of
inhibiting the protease activity of the virus. The drug remdesivir
induces the termination of viral protein synthesis by inhibiting RNA
polymerase. Many repurposed antiviral drugs are being investi-
gated, and some are still in the initial stages of regulatory approval.
Recently U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has approved
antiviral drugs such as molnupiravir, paxlovid(nirmatrelvir/rito-
navir), which gives concern to the new strains of SARS-Cov-2.
Molnupiravir is a prodrug of N-hydroxycytidine (NHC) with activ-
ity against SARS-CoV-2 and other RNA viruses and a high barrier to
resistance development [ 10]. Molnupiravir found to follow “error
catastrophe ”mechanism, which is built on the concept that
increasing the rate of mutation in the viral genome beyond a bio-
logically tolerable threshold will render the virus lethal and lead to
its extinction [ 11]. Paxlovid is a brand name for a combination
therapy that includes nirmatrelvir and ritonavir. Nirmatrelvir is a
SARS-CoV-2 protease inhibitor. Coadministration of nirmatrelvir
with a low dose of ritonavir (commonly used in combination with
other protease inhibitors as part of antiretroviral therapy for HIV
infection) slows hepatic metabolism of nirmatrelvir, allowing it to
remain active in the body for a more extended period. Corticoste-
roids are also used to treat COVID-19 infection which shows their
effectiveness in suppressing multiple in ﬂammatory genes. Gluco-
corticoids, such as dexamethasone, have been used as anti-
inﬂammatory and immunosuppressive medications. Dexametha-
sone prevents the entry of SARS-CoV-2 spike pseudo typed virus
into host cells by preventing the binding of angiotensin converting
enzyme-2 (ACE-2) receptors to the spike protein [ 12]. Azithromycin
is the potential antibiotic used in the treatment of COVID-19infection, and it exhibits antiviral activity by reducing viral entry
into host cells and also exhibits its immunomodulatory effect by
inhibiting the release of cytokine mainly involved in COVID 19
infection [ 13]. Anti-parasitic drugs involved in the treatment of
COVID-19 infection are chloroquine, hydroxychloroquine, and
ivermectin. Chloroquine prevents the entry of SARS-CoV-2 into
host organisms by preventing glycosylation of ACE-2 receptors.
Glycosylation of ACE-2 receptors gets activated when the virus
binds to ACE-2 receptors, providing entry of the virus to the host
cell. Chloroquine also works by inhibiting endosome and lysosome
acidiﬁcation, causing the virus to stall inside endosomes andpreventing the viral RNA genome from being released into the
cytosol [ 14]. The cytokine storms activated by the overproduction
of proin
ﬂammatory cytokines were observed in COVID-19 patients.
In such conditions, proin ﬂammatory cytokines such as interleukin
1 (IL-1) and interleukin 6 (IL-6) levels are typically elevated. Drugs
that inhibit the biological activity of IL-1 and its downstream
product, IL-6, may help treat SARS-CoV-2 infection [ 15]. Currently,
the COVID-19 treatment guidelines have recommended using two
drugs such as Sarilumab and Tocilizumab. Anti-SARS-CoV-2
monoclonal antibodies that target the spike protein were shown
to be clinically effective in treating COVID-19 infection. These
involve drugs such as Bamlanivimab plus etesevimab, casirivimab
plus imdevimab, and sotrovimab, which received emergency use
authorization to treat mild to moderate COVID-19 in nonhospital-
ized patients.
3. Method
We consulted six Databases.
a) Micromedex drug interaction
b) Medicine complete.com
c) Liverpool Drug Interaction Group for COVID-19 therapies
d) Epocrates
e) Medscape
f) drugs.com.
To acquire information on possible interaction effects between
drugs used for COVID-19 treatment such as atazanavir, lopinavir/
ritonavir, remdesivir, molnupiravir, paxlovid (nirmatrelvir/ritona-
vir), dexamethasone, azithromycin, chloroquine, and FDA approved
monoclonal antibody with primarily used antidiabetic drugs,
antihypertensive drugs, and drugs acting on the cardiovascular
system.
4. Potential interaction risk between drugs used in treatment
of COVID-19 and drugs used in treating comorbid conditions
Potential interaction effects between antidiabetic drugs and
covid treatment drugs involve hypoglycemia, lactic acidosis, and
worsening glycemic control. The majority of the databases showed
Signiﬁcant interactions between lopinavir/Ritonavir and metfor-
min. Chloroquine interacts with all the antidiabetic drugs, of which
moderate interaction risk was seen with atazanavir and dexa-
methasone. These prominent effects have been conveyed from
more than three databases, as shown in Table 1 . Drug paxlovid, a
combination of nirmatrelvir and ritonavir, was found to interact
with all the listed antidiabetic drugs, signi ﬁcantly with glimepiride
and glipizide.
The potential interaction effect of increased risk of bleeding
with major severity is conveyed by more than three databases
between paxlovid (nirmatrelvir/ritonavir) and drugs acting on the
cardiovascular system (ticagrelor, warfarin, and rivaroxaban).
Rhabdomyolysis, myopathy remains a possible potential interac-
tion effect between lopinavir/ritonavir, paxlovid, atazanavir, and
atorvastatin. Other drugs such as dexamethasone, chloroquine, andmonoclonals such as sarilumab and tocilizumab provide moderate
interaction with cardioprotective drugs that need caution and
monitoring. Azithromycin potentially interacts with cardiovascular
drugs such as warfarin and rivaroxaban conveyed from more than
three databases as shown in Table 2 . However, monitoring is
mandatory in all conditions.
Hypotension and irregular heart rhythm are the possible inter-
action effects between drugs used in COVID-19 treatment and
primarily used antihypertensive drugs (enalapril, Lisinopril,S.R. S K, A. P A, S. B et al. Diabetes &Metabolic Syndrome: Clinical Research &Reviews 16 (2022) 102451
2Olmesartan, telmisartan, propranolol, and atenolol). Interactions
with major severity are found to be with the drug atazanavir. These
Interactions are conveyed from more than three databases. Dexa-
methasone was found to produce potential interaction effects with
all antihypertensive drugs with moderate severity. Other drugs
such as azithromycin chloroquine were found to moderately
interact with some antihypertensive drugs that need monitoring of
parameters, as explained in Table 3 . As drug interaction potentially
results in toxicity effects or therapeutic failure, concern on the
coadministration of drugs is mandatory. These interactions may or
may not affect therapy based on the individual patient's pharma-
cokinetics and pharmacodynamics. Therefore, There is a need for
health care professionals to be aware of potential effects associated
with drug interactions.
5. Discussion
5.1. Drugs used in treatment of COVID-19 and antidiabetic drugs
Drug interactions may produce unwanted effects during phar-
macological treatment, which is common among patients receiving
more drugs. Polypharmacy remains a signi ﬁcant cause for drug-
drug interactions. These drug-drug interactions result in either
toxicity effects or therapeutic failure. In this Review, we have
analyzed six databases to check possible interaction effectsbetween drugs used in COVID-19 treatment and primarily pre-
scribed drugs for comorbid conditions such as hypertension, dia-
betes, and cardiovascular illness, which remain major mortality risk
factors during the COVID-19 pandemic. Green, yellow, red explains
the severity of the interaction effects. Green indicates no in-
teractions, yellow and red refer to moderate and major severity,
respectively. The interactions effects are discussed between COVID-
19 treatment drugs and antidiabetic, antihypertensive, and drugs
acting on the cardiovascular system. In this Review, one drug from
each category has been chosen as all drugs in the same class possess
a similar mechanism of action. This mechanism of action remains
signiﬁcant for checking out interactions.
Diabetes mellitus is managed by drugs that belong to biguanides
(metformin), sulfonylurea (glimepiride and gliclazide), Dipeptidyl
peptidase (DPP) 4 inhibitors (linagliptin and sitagliptin), alpha1
glucosidase inhibitors (acarbose). These drugs are primarily chosen
to check interactions with drugs used in COVID-19 treatment. Po-
tential effects such as worsening glycemic control, hypoglycemia,
increased risk of lactic acidosis are the possible interaction effects
with drugs used in COVID-19 treatment. The results of the inter-
action are conveyed in Table 1 . Interaction with major severity is
found with drugs lopinavir/ritonavir and chloroquine. The signi ﬁ-
cant possible effect found between lopinavir/ritonavir and met-
formin is increased risk of lactic acidosis, so concurrent
administration is not recommended in renal or hepatic impairmentTable 1
Drugs used in treatment of COVID-19 and anti diabetic drug.S.R. S K, A. P A, S. B et al. Diabetes &Metabolic Syndrome: Clinical Research &Reviews 16 (2022) 102451
3patients. Symptom monitoring is always recommended. Chloro-
quine produced signi ﬁcant interaction with all antidiabetic drugs as
listed on Table 1 . Chloroquine enhances the hypoglycemic effect
when co-administered with antidiabetic drugs due to the syner-
gistic effect. Hence the possible impact found to be the risk of hy-
poglycemia. The antagonistic effect is seen with concomitant use of
dexamethasone and antidiabetic drugs. Dexamethasone was found
to antagonize the effectiveness of hypoglycemic agents. Monitoring
the glycemic level of the patient is mandatory during treatment.
Nirmatrelvir/ritonavir can alter the effect of antidiabetic drugs by
enzyme induction when used for an extended period. However, the
risk is low, monitoring blood glucose levels is recommended during
treatment. These interaction effects, as mentioned above, may or
may not be at a higher risk in all patients. However, monitoring the
patient's glycemic level is essential as these interactions can pro-
duce toxicity effects or result in therapeutic failure.
5.2. Drugs used in treatment of COVID-19 and drus acting on
cardiovascular system
Drugs acting on the cardiovascular system discussed in this
Review belong to a category such as Anticoagulants (warfarin,
rivaroxaban), anti-platelets (aspirin, clopidogrel, ticagrelor), and
dyslipidemic agents (atorvastatin), and these drugs checked for
interaction with the drug used in COVID-19 treatment. The resultswere analyzed from six databases, as shown in Table 2 . Signi ﬁcant
interactions were possible with atazanavir and ticagrelor, which
likely may increase the risk of bleeding, which involves the
mechanism of enzyme inhibition by the drug atazanavir. Moni-
toring of hematological parameters is mandatory. It has been rec-
ommended that the use of drugs that belongs to potent
CytochromeP450 3A4 (CYP3A4) inhibitors (E.g., atazanavir) can be
avoided while it is necessary for receiving ticagrelor. Another sig-
niﬁcant interaction is seen with atazanavir and atorvastatin, which
explains the potential effect of enhanced exposure of drug ator-
vastatin which has a high capability of resulting in toxicity. The
combination drugs such as Lopinavir/ritonavir and nirmatrelvir/
ritonavir (paxlovid) potentially interact with clopidogrel, ticagrelor,
warfarin, and rivaroxaban resulting in increased exposure to clo-
pidogrel, ticagrelor, warfarin and rivaroxaban, respectively indi-
cating the risk of bleeding. At such conditions, dosage adjustment
and routine monitoring of hematology pro ﬁle are recommended.
The risk of myopathy and rhabdomyolysis, a condition associated
with a muscle injury, is indicated with concomitant use of Lopi-
navir/ritonavir with atorvastatin. Monitoring toxicity symptoms are
recommended for this kind of effect. If so seen, dosage adjustment
or frequency adjustment has to be initiated. Increased risk ofrhabdomyolysis is also seen with concomitant use of azithromycin
with atorvastatin. The drugs with a higher risk of producing drug
interaction are atazanavir and lopinavir/ritonavir, and nirmatrelvir/Table 2
Drugs used in treatment of COVID 19 and drugs acting on cardiovascular system.S.R. S K, A. P A, S. B et al. Diabetes &Metabolic Syndrome: Clinical Research &Reviews 16 (2022) 102451
4ritonavir. These are to be made under consideration during
administration. Increased risk of bleeding is indicated with
concomitant use of warfarin and rivaroxaban with azithromycin.
Hematological parameters to be monitored regularly during the
treatment. Other drugs of COVID-19 therapy are found to produce
moderate interactions, which needs monitoring, but patients are
not found to be at higher risk; however, monitoring is always
required. Effects that remain possible with moderate interactions
are increased risk of bleeding and elevated INR (international
normalized ratio) values.
5.3. Drugs used in treatment of COVID 19 and antihypertensive
drugs
Hypertension is pharmacologically treated Primarily with beta-
blockers (atenolol, propranolol), Angiotensin converting enzyme
(ACE) inhibitors (enalapril. Lisinopril), Angiotensin receptor
blockers (Olmesartan, telmisartan), and calcium channel blockers
(Amlodipine), interaction of these drugs with drugs used in COVID
19 treatment are shown in Table 3 . Hypotension, irregular heart
rhythm, electrocardiographic (ECG) changes are the potential ef-
fects of drug interaction with COVID-19 treatment drugs and anti-
hypertensive drugs. Interaction with major severity is found
between atazanavir and beta-blockers (propranolol, atenolol),resulting in irregular heart rhythm or additive PR interval prolon-
gation. Concurrent use is not recommended, In case of necessity,
their ECG parameters are to be monitored during treatment. More
than three databases conveyed Possible interactions with Amlodi-
pine and atazanavir. Its effect remains with major severity,
increasing risk of cardiotoxicity PR interval prolongation are
considered to be the effects of major severity. Therefore, Routine
ECG monitoring is required. The same interaction effect is also seen
with lopinavir/ritonavir with major severity. Dexamethasone in-
teracts with all the antihypertensive drugs with moderate severity
producing an impact of antagonization of antihypertensive effect
resulting in therapeutic failure. This interaction is at low risk as
they are conveyed from a single database. These interaction effects
need consideration for frequency adjustment. Other drugs such as
azithromycin chloroquine showed potential interaction with anti-
hypertensive drugs, resulting in ECG changes and prolongation of
PR or QT interval; therefore, caution is advised for the concomitant
use of these drugs with atenolol, propranolol, and Amlodipine.
Nirmatrelvir/ritonavir enhances plasma drug concentration of cal-
cium channel blockers by enzyme inhibition resulting in hypoten-
sion. Monitoring for symptoms related to hypotension is strictly
recommended. If concurrent use of the drug mentioned above is
unavoidable, renal function, ECG parameters, and blood pressure
are to be routinely examined to prevent potential effects thatTable 3
Drugs used in treatment of COVID 19 and antihypertensive drugs.S.R. S K, A. P A, S. B et al. Diabetes &Metabolic Syndrome: Clinical Research &Reviews 16 (2022) 102451
5results from drug-drug interactions.
5.4. Drug interaction with monoclonal antibody
One of the proposed COVID-19 therapeutic options is a mono-
clonal antibody. Anti-SARS-CoV-2 monoclonal antibodies are
among the most recent investigational COVID-19 treatments
permitted for emergency use authorization (EUA) by the US Food
and Drug Administration (FDA). A clinical perspective of drug-drug
interactions with a monoclonal antibody are unlikely to occur.
Interleukin 6 inhibitor monoclonals such as sarilumab, Tocilizumab,
recommended for COVID-19 treatment, was found to interact with
drugs acting on the cardiovascular system. These drugs were found
to suppress the action of co-administered cardioprotective medi-
cations by affecting the expression of drug-metabolizing enzymes
that may result in therapeutic failure. Although the interaction
potential is less prominent as conveyed from fewer databases,
therapeutic monitoring of effects is recommended during treat-
ment. Tocilumab and sarilumab were found to moderately interact
with antihypertensive drugs such as Amlodipine and found that
these drugs reduce the ef ﬁcacy of Amlodipine by affecting the drug-
metabolizing enzymes. It is less risky however therapeutic moni-
toring of effect is required. The FDA-approved Anti-SARS-CoV-2
monoclonal antibodies such as casirivimab/imdevimab, etesevi-
mab/bamlanivimab, sotrovimab are not found to interact with
antidiabetic, antihypertensive, or with drugs acting on the cardio-
vascular system. The absence of interaction is detected with these
monoclonals however these drugs are recommended for patients
who are hospitalized for a diagnosis other than COVID-19, provided
they have mild to moderate COVID-19 infection and are at high risk
for progressing to severe disease.
6. Limitations
The major limitation of this study is; as it does not include
clinical evidence or a systematic review. This review has been
carried out from evidence based primary sources in the view of to
address the caution behind the use of drug during COVID-19
treatment.
7. Conclusion
Management of comorbid conditions is unavoidable. Patients
with underlying diseases receive complex drugs risking drug
interaction. Drug-drug interactions remain one of the challenging
issues during treatment, as they may develop either toxicity or
therapeutic failure, which may in ﬂuence the patient's treatment
efﬁcacy. Since the Safety concern of patients remains mandatory
during their treatment, this review highlights the possible effects of
drug interactions between drugs used in COVID-19 treatment and
drugs used primarily for comorbid conditions when used simul-
taneously. Therefore, this primary evidence may concern prevent-
ing potential or unintentional effects resulting from a Drug-drug
interaction, Improving patient quality of life.
CRediT authorship contribution statement
SRSK, APA: Methodology and Writing. SB, KKP: Data curation
and Review. APM: Investigation and Resource. SS: Writing, Editing,
Conceptualization and Supervision.Ethics approval and consent to participate
Not applicable.
Consent for publication
Not applicable.
Funding
No funding received.
Declaration of interests
The authors declare that they have no known competing
ﬁnancial interests or personal relationships that could have
appeared to in ﬂuence the work reported in this paper.
Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare no con ﬂict of interest in the contents of the
manuscript.
Acknowledgments
We would like to thank all health care professionals.
References
[1]Jain A. Deregulated kynurenine metabolism - an alternate hypothesis for
COVID-19 associated anosmia. Med Hypotheses 2021;157:110721 .
[2]Preethi L, Ganamurali N, Dhanasekaran D, Sabarathinam S. Therapeutic use of
Guggulsterone in COVID-19 induced obesity (COVIBESITY) and signi ﬁcant role
in immunomodulatory effect. Obes Med 2021;24:100346 .
[3] Plasencia-García, Oda Beatriz, et al. Drug-drug interactions between COVID-19
treatments and antipsychotics drugs: integrated evidence from 4 databases
and a systematic review. Psychopharmacology 2021;238(2):329 e40.https://
doi.org/10.1007/s00213-020-05716-4 .
[4]Guzik TJ, Mohiddin SA, Dimarco A, et al. COVID-19 and the cardiovascular
system: implications for risk assessment, diagnosis, and treatment options.
Cardiovasc Res 2020;116(10):1666 e87.
[5]Bandopadhyay A, Singh AK, Chaubey G. COVID-19: the cause of the man-
ifested cardiovascular complications during the pandemic, vol. 8; 2021. 1481 .
[6]Brandariz-Nu ~nez David, et al. Potential drug-drug interactions in COVID 19
patients in treatment with lopinavir/ritonavir. Med Clin 2020 Oct 9;155(7):281e7. PMCID: PMC7346810 .
[7]Coopersmith CM, Antonelli M, Bauer SR, et al. The surviving sepsis campaign:
research priorities for coronavirus disease 2019 in critical illness. Crit Care
Med 2021;49(4):598 e622.
[8]Sanyaolu A, Okorie C, Marinkovic A, et al. Comorbidity and its Impact on Pa-
tients with COVID-19. SN comprehensive clinical medicine. 2020. p. 1 e8.
[9]Wu R, Wang L, Kuo HD, et al. An update on current therapeutic drugs treating
COVID-19. Curr Pharmacol Rep 2020:1 e15.
[10] Jayk Bernal A, Gomes da Silva MM, Musungaie DB, et al. Molnupiravir for oral
treatment of covid-19 in nonhospitalized patients. 2021 .
[11] Singh AK, Singh A, Singh R, Misra A. Molnupiravir in COVID-19: a systematic
review of literature. Diabetes, Metab. Syndrome: Clin Res Rev 2021;15(6):102329 .
[12] Zhang Y, Hu S, Wang J, Xue Z, Wang C, Wang N. Dexamethasone inhibits
SARS-CoV-2 spike pseudotyped virus viropexis by binding to ACE2. Virology
2021;554:83 e8.
[13] Vallejos J, Zoni R, Bangher M, et al. Ivermectin to prevent hospitalizations in
patients with COVID-19 (IVERCOR-COVID19): a structured summary of a
study protocol for a randomized controlled trial. Trials 2020;21(1):965 .
[14] Devaux CA, Rolain J-M, Colson P, Raoult D. New insights on the antiviral ef-
fects of chloroquine against coronavirus: what to expect for COVID-19? Int J
Antimicrob Agents 2020;55(5):105938 .
[15] Ucciferri C, Vecchiet J, Falasca K. Role of monoclonal antibody drugs in the
treatment of COVID-19. World J Clin Cases 2020;8(19):4280 e5.S.R. S K, A. P A, S. B et al. Diabetes &Metabolic Syndrome: Clinical Research &Reviews 16 (2022) 102451
6