322 |       Clin Transl Sci. 2022;15:322–329. www.cts-journal.com
Received: 23 July 2021 |  Revised: 9 September 2021 |  Accepted: 29 September 2021
DOI: 10.1111/cts.13172  
MINI-­ REVIEW
Adapting­regulatory­drug-­ drug­interaction­guidance­to­
design­clinical­pharmacokinetic­natural­product-­ drug­
interaction­studies:­A­NaPDI­Center­recommended­
approach
Emily­J. Cox1­|­­­Allan­E. Rettie2,3­|­­­Jashvant­D. Unadkat3,4­|­­­Kenneth­E. Thummel3,4­|­­­
Jeannine­S. McCune3,4­|­­­Mary­F. Paine1,3
This is an open access article under the terms of  the Creat  ive Commo  ns Attri  bution-NonCo  mmercial License, which permits use, distribution and reproduction in any 
medium, provided the original work is properly cited and is not used for commercial purposes.
© 2021  The Authors. Clinical and Translational Science published by  Wiley Periodicals LLC on behalf  of American Society for Clinical Pharmacology and  Therapeutics.1Department of  Pharmaceutical 
Sciences, College of  Pharmacy and 
Pharmaceutical Sciences,  Washington 
State University, Spokane,  Washington, 
USA
2Department of  Medicinal Chemistry, 
School of  Pharmacy, University of  
Washington, Seattle,  Washington, USA
3Center of  Excellence for Natural 
Product Drug Interaction Research, 
Spokane,  Washington, USA
4Department of  Pharmaceutics, School 
of Pharmacy, University of  Washington, 
Seattle,  Washington, USA
Correspondence
Mary F. Paine, Department of  
Pharmaceutical Sciences, College 
of Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical 
Sciences, 412 E Spokane Falls Blvd, 
Washington State University, Spokane, 
WA 99202, USA.
Email: mary.paine@wsu.edu
Funding­information
This work was supported by the 
National Institutes of  Health National 
Center for Complementary and 
Integrative Health and the Office of  
Dietary Supplements, specifically 
the Center of  Excellence for Natural 
Product Drug Interaction Research 
(U54 AT008909).Abstract
Pharmacokinetic  drug  interactions  precipitated  by botanical  and  other  natu-
ral products  (NPs)  remain  critically  understudied.  Investigating  these  complex 
interactions  is fraught  with  difficulties  due  to the methodologic  and  technical 
challenges  associated  with  the inherently  complex  chemistries  and product  vari-
ability  of NPs.  This  knowledge  gap is perpetuated  by a continuing  absence  of a 
harmonized  framework  regarding  the design  of clinical  pharmacokinetic  stud-
ies of NPs  and NP- drug  interactions.  Accordingly,  this Recommended  Approach, 
the fourth  in a series  of Recommended  Approaches  released  by the Center  of 
Excellence  for Natural  Product  Drug  Interaction  Research  (NaPDI  Center),  pro-
vides  recommendations  for the design  of clinical  pharmacokinetic  studies  involv-
ing NPs.  Building  on prior  Recommended  Approaches  and data  generated  from 
the NaPDI  Center,  such  a framework  is presented  for the design  of (1) phase  0 
studies  to assess  the pharmacokinetics  of an NP and (2) clinical  pharmacokinetic 
NP- drug  interaction  studies.  Suggestions  for NP sourcing,  dosing,  study  design, 
participant  selection,  sampling  periods,  and data  analysis  are presented.  With  the 
intent  to begin  addressing  the gap between  regulatory  agencies’  guidance  docu-
ments  about  drug-  drug  interactions  and  contemporary  NPDI  research,  the ob-
jective  of this Recommended  Approach  is to propose  methods  for the design  of 
clinical pharmacokinetic studies of NPs and NP-  drug interactions.­­­|­323
CLINICAL PHARMACOKINETIC NPDI STUDY DESIGN
INTRODUCTION
Pharmacokinetic  interactions  between  pharmaceutical 
medications  and botanical  or other  natural  products  (NPs) 
are uniquely  difficult  to predict  and  evaluate.  However, 
the need  for such  assessments  is compelling.  The  ratio -
nale  is that  the practice  of self- medicating  with  NPs  is 
increasingly  widespread  and  concentrated  among  indi-
viduals  potentially  at high  risk for adverse  NP- drug  inter -
actions  (NPDIs).  A large  survey  of American  adults  (n = 
26,157)  reported  that  approximately  one- third  used  NPs.1 
NP usage  was higher  among  individuals  taking  prescrip -
tion  medications  and  those  afflicted  with  cardiovascular 
disease,  diabetes,  or cancer.1 These  data  indicated  that NP 
use is common  in populations  treated  with  drugs  with 
narrow  therapeutic  indices;  in fact,  NP- chemotherapeutic 
agent  interactions  have  been  a longstanding  concern.2 The 
collective  data  highlight  that  NP use is high  among  indi-
viduals  with  health  risks,  probably  because  of beliefs  sur-
rounding  a benefit  of “naturalness”  and a desire  to avoid 
toxicity from prescription medications.3,4
Textbook  examples  of pharmacokinetic  NPDIs  include 
those  involving  the NP precipitants  (aka  perpetrators)  St. 
John’s  wort,  a cytochrome  P450  (CYP)  3A inducer,  and 
grapefruit  juice,  a CYP3A  inhibitor.  Co- consuming  object 
(aka  victim)  drugs  that  are CYP3A  substrates  (e.g.,  cyclo -
sporine,  tacrolimus,  hepatitis  C protease  inhibitors,  HIV 
protease  inhibitors,  and  several  anti-  cancer  agents)  with 
St. John’s  wort  can lead  to increased  drug  clearance  and 
potentially  reduced  efficacy,  whereas  co- consuming  these 
drugs  with  grapefruit  juice  can  lead  to decreased  drug 
clearance  and potential  toxicity.5,6 Unlike  NPs,  the poten-
tial for concomitant  medications  to precipitate  pharmaco -
kinetic  interactions  with  object  drugs  is well-  established, 
and multiple  regulatory  agencies  have  produced  guidance 
documents  about  how  to assess  such  drug-  drug  interac-
tions  (DDIs).7- 11 Because  DDI  liability  is well-  established 
for pharmaceutical  drugs,  DDIs  can be averted  by avoid-
ing concomitant  medications  that  are known  inhibitors/
inducers  of relevant  drug  metabolizing  enzymes  and/or 
transporters  or minimized  via dosage  adjustment  of the 
precipitant  and/or  object  drug.  However,  with  few excep -
tions  (e.g.,  St. John’s  wort  and grapefruit  juice),  whether 
a pharmacokinetic  NPDI  adversely  impacts  the outcomes 
(i.e.,  decreases  effectiveness  and/or  increases  toxicity)  of 
an object  drug  typically  is not known.  Thus,  perturbation 
of object  drug  pharmacokinetics,  and  in turn  drug  re-
sponse,  by an NP in the population  at large  and especially 
in vulnerable  patient  groups  who  report  the highest  use 
of NPs,  constitutes  an unmonitored  and  ongoing  public 
health concern.
Recognizing  the need  to mitigate  potential  NPDI  risk, 
the National  Institutes  of Health  National  Center  for Complementary  and  Integrative  Health  established  the 
Center  of Excellence  for Natural  Product  Drug  Interaction 
Research  (NaPDI  Center),  which  was tasked  to develop  a 
set of Recommended  Approaches  to guide  optimal  NPDI 
research  studies.12 These  Recommended  Approaches  pro-
vide  frameworks  for the (i) selection  and prioritization  of 
NPs as precipitants  of potential  pharmacokinetic  NPDIs13; 
(ii) sourcing  and characterization  of NPs  for in vitro  and 
in vivo  pharmacokinetic  studies14; and (iii) evaluation  of 
an NP as a precipitant  of pharmacokinetic  NPDIs  using 
predictive  static  and/or  physiologically-  based  pharma-
cokinetic  (PBPK)  models15 (Figure  1).  These  predictive 
models  are based  on in vitro  studies  assessing  the po-
tential  of an NP to inhibit  or induce  drug  metabolizing 
enzymes  (e.g.,  CYPs)  or transporters  (e.g.,  organic  anion 
transporting  polypeptides)  at pharmacologically  rele-
vant  unbound  plasma  or intestinal  concentrations  of the 
NP constituent(s).  Typically,  these  studies  are conducted 
with  individually  expressed  recombinant  enzymes  or 
transporter-  expressing  cell  lines/vesicles,  followed  with 
human  liver  microsomes/cytosol  (for enzymes)  or human 
hepatocytes  (for enzymes  and  transporters).  If the static 
and/or  PBPK  models  predict  a potential  NPDI  with  the 
object  drug,  a clinical  pharmacokinetic  NPDI  study  will 
be triggered.
This  Recommended  Approach,  the fourth  in the series 
from  the NaPDI  Center,  builds  upon  prior  publications 
by presenting  a strategy  for conducting  clinical  pharma-
cokinetic  studies  involving  NPs.  Two  types  of studies  are 
discussed:  (i) phase  0 studies  designed  to determine  the 
pharmacokinetics  of a given  NP for the first  time,  and (ii) 
clinical  NPDI  studies  designed  to determine  the effects  of 
an NP on the pharmacokinetics of  (an) object drug(s).
WHEN­ARE­CLINICAL­NATURAL ­
PRODUCT-­ DRUG­INTERACTION ­
STUDIES­ WARRANTED?
Due  to the intensive  resource  and time  requirements,  con-
ducting  clinical  studies  for multiple  NPs  with  unknown 
drug  interaction  liability  is not feasible.  Consequently,  the 
NaPDI  Center  developed  decision  trees  to guide  the deter-
mination  of whether  clinical  pharmacokinetic  studies  are 
warranted.12 Briefly,  if there  are no in vitro  data  available 
but an NPDI  is suspected,  mechanistic  in vitro  studies  in-
volving  established  probe  drugs  and model  systems  should 
be conducted  as described13,15 (Figure 2).  The  advantage 
of these  studies  is that results  can be extrapolated  to other 
drugs  metabolized  or transported  by the probed  enzymes 
and transporters.  For example,  an in vitro-  in vivo  extrap-
olation  approach  involving  a mechanistic  static  model 
predicted  12 of 15 CYP3A-  mediated  grapefruit  juice-  drug 324­|­­­
COX et al.
interactions  to within  25%  of the observed  change  in ob-
ject drug  AUC.16 More  recently,  mechanistic  static  models 
predicted  that  mitragynine,  a major  alkaloid  in kratom 
(Mitragyna speciosa),  would  increase  systemic  exposure 
to midazolam  and  other  CYP3A  substrates  by 1.55-  fold 
(zolpidem)  to 14- fold  (buspirone)17 and  that  the major 
cannabinoids  in cannabis  (Cannabis sativa),  cannabidiol 
and  (−)- trans- Δ9- tetrahydrocannabinol,  would  increase 
systemic  exposure  to various  CYP  probe  drugs  by up to 
24- fold.18 Regarding  transporter-  mediated  NPDIs,  basic 
models  were  used  to predict  whether  an interaction  would 
occur  between  goldenseal  and the transporter  probe  drugs 
furosemide,  metformin,  and  rosuvastatin.19 Additional 
examples  are summarized  in the NaPDI  Center’s  most  re-
cent Recommended Approach.15
If biophysical  and in vitro  NPDI  data  are available  and 
suggest  an NPDI,  a phase  0 study  is merited  to describe 
pharmacokinetic  behavior  of select  phytoconstituents 
(targeted  based  on abundance  and plausibility  of biolog -
ical effects)  and  recover  fundamental  metrics  (e.g.,  area 
under  the blood  or plasma  concentration  versus  time  curve 
[AUC],  maximum  concentration  [Cmax], time  to reach Cmax [tmax], terminal  half-  life ]t1/2], and renal  clearance  if 
urine  is collected).  Finally,  if robust  clinical  pharmacoki-
netic  information  is available,  in vitro  data  are available 
suggesting  an NPDI,  and static  and/or  PBPK  models  pre-
dict object  drug  AUC  ratios  (i.e.,  AUC  of the object  drug 
in the presence  to absence  of an NP)  that  lay outside  the 
default  no effect  range  of 0.80–  1.25,7 a powered  clinical 
pharmacokinetic  NPDI  study  in healthy  volunteers  may 
be warranted.
NATURAL­PRODUCT­SELECTION
To ensure  the results  of a clinical  pharmacokinetic  NPDI  
study  will  be generalizable,  the NP to be studied  should  
be a formulation  that  is commercially  available  and com-
monly  used.  The  specific  product  should  be selected  and 
characterized  in detail  according  to the NaPDI  Center’s  
previous  Recommended  Approach.14 Details  that  should  
be reported  include  genus  and  species,  batch  numbers,  
manufacturers,  and  both  the  labeled  and  measured  
concentrations  of key phytoconstituents  present  in the FIGURE­1­ The National Center for Complementary and Integrative Health established the Center of Excellence for Natural Product 
Drug Interaction Research (NaPDI Center), whose primary goal is to develop guidelines for natural product-  drug interaction research 
studies. The current work is the fourth in a series of Recommended Approaches released by the NaPDI Center. These recommendations 
cover fundamental topics such as determining which natural products (NPs) or constituents are priorities for study,13 sourcing NPs,14 
predicting pharmacokinetic NP-  drug interactions,15 and conducting clinical pharmacokinetic studies when warranted (present work)
Identifying natural products with drug interaction liability
•Estimating likelihood of clinically  significant drug interactions
•Weighing available evidenc e
•Selecting high-risk natural productsRecommended 
Approach
Selecting and sourcing natural product s
•Commercial market research and product selectio n
•Authenticating specimen s
•Measuring concentrations, batch consistenc y, and stabilit y
Pharmacokinetic modeling for natural product s
•Narrowing down precipitant constituents
•Populating models
•Predicting natural product-drug interactions through in vitr ostudie s
Conducting clinical studies with natural product s
•Determining when clinical studies are warrante d
•Conducting Phase 0 studies
•Conducting natural product-drug interaction studie s1
2
3
4NP
DrugDrug
NP­­­|­325
CLINICAL PHARMACOKINETIC NPDI STUDY DESIGN
NP. Additionally,  for a clinical  NPDI  study,  the product  
should  be chosen  to best  reveal  the interaction  at the 
suspected  site.  For  example,  if the site  of a suspected  
NPDI  is the intestine,  and  the typical  administration  
route  for the commercially  available  formulation  is oral,  an ideal  approach  would  be to study  multiple  oral  for-
mulations.  This  task  can be daunting  and  may  necessi-
tate  multiple  studies  with  different  products  and  probe  
drugs.  For  example,  cannabis  products  can  be admin-
istered  orally,  topically,  or via inhalation  and  may  pre-
cipitate  NPDIs  in the intestine,  liver,  and/or  lung.20 As 
aforementioned,  cannabinoids  have  the potential  to in-
hibit  multiple  CYPs,18,20 but the site and  magnitude  of 
cannabinoid-  drug  interactions  likely  will  depend  on the 
route  of cannabis  administration  and associated  peak  tis-
sue concentrations.
REDUCING­PRE-­ ANALYTICAL ­
ERROR
If the stability  of the NP phytoconstituent(s)  in biofluids 
(e.g.,  plasma  and  urine)  is unknown,  a subset  of initial 
pharmacokinetic  samples  should  be processed  in real 
time.  Preferably,  stability  studies  should  precede  the de-
sign  of the pharmacokinetic  study.  Alternatively,  a larger 
volume  of blood/plasma  can be collected  per time  point 
such that aliquots can be diverted to stability analysis.
ANTICIPATING­UNEXPECTED ­
RESULTS
As with  any  clinical  pharmacokinetic  study,  an unex-
pected  NPDI  may  stem  from  interindividual  differences,  
including  pharmacogenomics,  race/ethnicity,  sex,  age, 
and dietary  habits.  An initial  clinical  NPDI  study  can be 
designed  to anticipate  the need  for post  hoc analyses  of 
these  effects.  For example,  participants  may  be presented  
the option  to consent  to collection  of additional  bio- 
banking  samples,  which  can be used  for follow-  up metab-
olomics,  metagenomics,  or pharmacogenomics  analyses  
if necessary.
PHASE­0­CLINICAL­STUDY ­DESIGN
Study­design­and­participants
The purpose  of a phase  0 clinical  study  of an NP is to gen-
erate  initial  pharmacokinetic  data  to guide  simulation  of 
potential  NPDIs.  These  studies  should  involve  a typical  
consumer  dose  of the NP and a small  number  of partici-
pants,  typically  5– 10 healthy  adult  volunteers.  Healthy  
volunteers  are preferred  to minimize  potential  adverse  
effects.  Patients  with  any  known  health  conditions  are 
not preferred,  as perturbations  in drug  pharmacokinet-
ics may  have  adverse  effects  and alter  the disposition  of FIGURE­2­ Decision tree for determining whether to conduct 
clinical pharmacokinetic phase 0 or natural product-  drug 
interaction (NPDI) studies. Phase 0 studies should be conducted 
when the pharmacokinetics of the phytoconstituents composing 
a natural product are unknown. These studies should yield 
fundamental metrics such as area under the blood or plasma 
concentration versus time curve (AUC), AUC ratio (AUCR), 
maximum concentration (Cmax), time to reach Cmax (tmax), and 
terminal half-  life (t1/2). Powered NPDI studies should be conducted 
if both of the following are true: (i) a phase 0 (or equivalent initial 
pharmacokinetic study) has been conducted and fundamental 
metrics are available, and (ii) an NPDI is predicted based on an 
AUCR laying outside the no-  effect range. †Default no-  effect range 
is 0.80–  1.257
Are biophy sical data 
available?Measure or predict 
biophy sical data.
Are pharmacokinetic  
data available?Conduct Phase 0 
study.
Is the simulated AUCR  
outside the default no -
effect range?†Do not  
conduct 
NPDI 
study.No
No
No
Conduct NPDI stud yYes
Yes
YesNatural produc t
Are there in vitro data 
suggesting a potential 
NPDI?If in vitro data are not
available but an NPDI
is suspected, conduct
mechanistic in vitr o
studiesNoYes326­|­­­
COX et al.
comedications.  The  healthy  volunteers  should  be non-
smoking,  should  not be taking  concomitant  medications  
known  to alter  the activity  of a drug  metabolizing  en-
zyme/transporter,  and  should  not have  known  health  
problems.  The cohort  should  be equally  divided  between  
men  and nonpregnant,  nonlactating  women  and should  
be ethnically  and  racially  representative  of the popu-
lation.  The  protocol  should  include  a predose  period  
(e.g.,  24 h)  during  which  participants  abstain  from  the 
following:
1. Caffeine  due  to the potential  for acute  interactions  
with  CYP1A2  and  having  diuretic  effects;
2. Alcohol;
3. Grapefruit  juice  and juices  prepared  from  other  related 
citrus  fruits  (e.g.,  pomelo)  due to the potential  for time- 
dependent inhibition of intestinal CYP3A4;
4. Fruit  juices  (e.g.,  grapefruit,  apple,  and  orange)  and 
green  tea due  to the potential  for acute  interactions 
with  intestinal  uptake  transporters,  such  as organic 
anion transporting peptides (OATPs);
5. Any other NPs, including dietary supplements;
6. Heavy  exercise  due to changes  in xenobiotic  clearance 
from  acutely  increased  cardiac  output  and blood  flow 
rate; and
7. Cannabis  products  (for  at least  3  weeks  prior  to the 
study)  due to the potential  for interactions  with  various 
drug metabolizing enzymes and transporters.
Dosing­and­sample­collection
Dosing  regimens  for a phase  0 study  to determine  NP 
phytoconstituent(s)  pharmacokinetics  differ  from  prin-
ciples  set forth  by the US Food  and Drug  Administration  
(FDA)  for exploratory  investigational  new  drug  studies.21 
Generally,  sub- pharmacological  doses  for NPs  are non-
existent,  and microdosing  is not feasible.  Rather,  a fixed  
single-  dose  regimen  using  a typical  consumer  dose  of the 
NP is preferred  to ensure  that  exposure  is minimized  and 
results  are generalizable.  The  time  of day the NP is ad-
ministered  should  be defined  based  on common  usage.  
The  pharmacokinetics  of an NP selected  for a phase  0 
study  often  are completely  uncharacterized,  but some  
pharmacokinetic  end  points  and  even  concentration-  
time  profiles  may  be predicted  from  biophysical  data 
using  contemporary  software,15,22 allowing  researchers  
to align  sampling  windows  with  the predicted  maximum  
concentration  of an uncharacterized  phytoconstituent.  
This  technique  also  can be used  to derive  estimates  of 
the clearance  of a given  phytoconstituent  to guide  the 
duration  of sample  collection  during  the terminal  elimi-
nation phase.Clinical­laboratory­tests
Because  the safety  profiles  of object  drugs  are known,  se-
lect safety  data  can generally  be collected  for NPDI  stud-
ies.23 However,  when  predictive  static  or PBPK  models  or 
preclinical  data  indicate  that the magnitude  of an NPDI  is 
likely  to exceed  the cutoff  (i.e.,  producing  an area  under 
the curve  ratio  [AUCR]  outside  of the 0.80–  1.25  range),7 
a more  complete  set of safety  data  may  be warranted.  For 
example,  hematology  and clinical  chemistry  should  be in-
cluded in the study schedule of  events.
Data­reporting
Study  results  should  include  the data  elements  presented 
in Table 1.
CLINICAL­PHARMACOKINETIC ­
NATURAL­PRODUCT-­ DRUG ­
INTERACTION­STUDY ­DESIGN
A clinical  pharmacokinetic  NPDI  study  is warranted  when 
static  or PBPK  models  produce  an estimated  AUCR  for the 
object  drug  that lay outside  the standard  no- effect  range  of 
0.80–  1.25.7 All of the same  study  design  characteristics  for 
phase 0 studies apply with the following exceptions.
Study­design­and­participants
Whereas  phase  0 studies  are designed  to initially  char-
acterize  the pharmacokinetics  of NP phytoconstituents, 
clinical  NPDI  studies  are designed  to evaluate  the effects 
of NPs  on the pharmacokinetics  of one  or more  object 
drugs.  Because  object  drug  pharmacokinetics  must  be 
evaluated  under  two  conditions  (absence  and  presence 
of the NP),  a crossover  study  design  is recommended  to 
maximize  statistical  power  with  a small  number  of partici-
pants.  Arms  of the crossover  study  should  be separated  by 
a washout  period  of at least  five of the estimated  half-  lives 
of either  the NP precipitant  phytoconstituent(s),  if known, 
or the object  drug,  whichever  is longer.  If induction  of a 
drug  metabolizing  enzyme  or transporter  is the suspected 
mechanism  of the interaction,  a fixed  sequence  study  de-
sign is recommended.
Exclusion  criteria  should  rule  out drug  regimens  that 
may  confound  interpretation  of the observed  NPDI  (e.g.,  
current  use  of hormonal  contraception,  antibiotics,  or 
strong  inducers  or inhibitors  of the drug  metabolizing  en-
zyme[s]  or transporter[s]  believed  to mediate  the NPDI).  A 
list of index  inhibitors  and inducers  is curated  by the FDA.8­­­|­327
CLINICAL PHARMACOKINETIC NPDI STUDY DESIGN
Dose­of ­the­precipitant­natural­product
NP dose  selection  for clinical  studies  evaluating  NPDIs  are 
akin  to that  for clinical  DDI  studies,  except  that  the usual 
consumer  dose  of the NP should  be used,  rather  than  the 
maximum  dose.6 The  following  dosing  regimens  are sug-
gested in order of preference.1. As for phase  0 studies,  fixed  single-  dose  regimens  
using  a typical  dose  of the NP are recommended.
2. If one  or both  of the following  conditions  are met, 
chronic dosing may be considered:
a. Induction  of a drug  metabolizing  enzyme/trans -
porter is suspected, or
b. The precipitant  NP constituent(s)  are time-  dependent TABLE­1  Data to report from clinical pharmacokinetic studies involving natural products
Metric­for­specific­natural­product­
constituent(s) Description
AUC Geometric mean and 90% confidence interval
Cmax Geometric mean and 90% confidence interval
tmax Median and range
t1/2 Geometric mean and 90% confidence interval
ClR (if urine and blood collected) Geometric mean and 90% confidence interval
Ae (if urine collected) Geometric mean and 90% confidence interval
Treatment compliance Frequency tables of missed doses
Treatment duration Average days of participation per subject, reported as mean and SD
Participant demographics Age, sex, ethnicity/race, body mass index, vital signs
Bioanalytical variables Lower limits of detection, percentage of samples outside limits of detection
Natural product data Source (vendor information, lot and batch numbers), genus and species, 
formulation, preparation, measured and labeled concentration(s) of 
phytoconstituent(s), dose, administration route
Safety outcomes Adverse events, serious adverse events, and corresponding rates; detection of any 
safety signals
Abbreviations: Ae, amount excreted into the urine; AUC, area under the plasma or blood concentration versus time curve; ClR, renal clearance; Cmax, 
maximum concentration; t1/2, half-  life; tmax, time to reach Cmax.
Metric Description
AUC, Cmax, and t1/2 Natural product constituent(s): geometric mean and 90% 
confidence interval
Object drug: geometric mean and 90% confidence interval in both 
the presence and absence of the natural product, as well as the 
treatment/baseline ratio
Renal clearanceaNatural product constituent(s): geometric mean and 90% 
confidence interval
Object drug: geometric mean and 90% confidence interval in both 
the presence and absence of the natural product, as well as the 
treatment/baseline ratioa
Renal excretionaNatural product constituent(s): geometric mean and 90% 
confidence interval
Object drug: geometric mean and 90% confidence interval in both 
the presence and absence of the natural product, as well as the 
treatment/baseline ratioa
Clinical response (if 
available)The clinical effect of the object drug (e.g., pupil diameter for 
centrally acting opioids) may be measured in the presence and 
absence of the natural product to supplement the observed 
change(s) in the pharmacokinetic data
Abbreviations: AUC, area under the plasma or blood concentration versus time curve; Cmax, maximum 
concentration; t1/2, terminal half-  life.
aReport if urine is collected.TABLE­2  Additional data to report 
from clinical pharmacokinetic natural 
product-  drug interaction studies328­|­­­
COX et al.
inhibitors, and the likelihood of  toxicity is low.
3. Dose  escalation  may  be considered  if the likelihood  of 
toxicity  is low and a potential  NPDI  is suspected  based 
on static  or PBPK  models  but is not observed  using  a 
low initial  typical  consumer  dose  of the precipitant  NP. 
The dose  escalation  schedule  should  remain  within  the 
typical consumer dose range of the NP.
Dose­of ­the­object­drug
A small  dose  of the object  drug  may  be considered  to re-
duce  the likelihood  of toxicity  if an NP is suspected  to 
reduce  clearance  of the object  drug.24 Established  probe  
drugs  that  can  be used  as object  drugs  are curated  by 
the FDA8 and  should  be dosed  according  to approved  
labeling.  If the NP is believed  to increase  clearance  of 
the object  drug,  careful  consideration  should  be given  
to sampling  intervals  and  to the lower  limits  of detec-
tion  of the bioanalytical  analysis  method,  which  typi-
cally  involves  liquid  chromatography  tandem  mass  
spectrometry.
Data­reporting
Study  results  should  include  the data  elements  listed  in 
Table  1  and  Table  2.  Pharmacodynamic  indicators  of a 
large  pharmacokinetic  perturbation  (e.g.,  pupil  diameter 
for opioid  agonists)  may  be collected  to correlate  with 
changes in object drug exposure.
FUTURE­RESEARCH
The  crux  of the decision  to conduct  a clinical  pharma-
cokinetic  NPDI  study  is rooted  in the results  obtained  
from  predictive  static  and/or  PBPK  models.15 This  deci-
sion  point  is considered  crucial  due  to the substantive  
resources  required  to conduct  clinical  studies.  Additional  
factors  contribute  to the uncertainty  of these  pharmacoki-
netic  models.  First,  modeling  NPDIs  for which  the site of 
interaction  is the intestinal  lumen  or intestinal  cells  (en-
terocytes)  is complicated  by the presence  of an unstirred  
water  layer  immediately  adjacent  to the mucosa.  Second,  
pharmacokinetic  models  do not currently  account  for the 
increasingly  apparent  contribution  of the microbiota  to 
drug  disposition.25,26 The  former  may  be explored  with  
more  sophisticated  pharmacokinetic  models.  Regarding  
the latter,  researchers  should  consider  collecting  fecal  
samples  and conducting  RNA  sequencing  studies  to iden-
tify populations  of microorganisms  that  may  contribute  
to an NPDI.SUMMARY
This  Recommended  Approach  proposes  that  clinical 
pharmacokinetic  studies  involving  NPs  can be conducted 
similarly  to those  involving  pharmaceutical  drugs  using 
available  regulatory  guidelines  with  appropriate  modifica-
tions.  Clinical  studies  with  NPs  can be conducted  akin  to 
(i) phase  0 studies  if no pharmacokinetic  data  for the NP 
phytoconstituent(s)  are available  and/or  (ii) pharmacoki-
netic  NPDI  studies  when  an NPDI  is suspected  (Figure 2). 
Because  the guidelines  for these  types  of clinical  investiga-
tions  do not account  for several  distinguishing  character-
istics  of NPs,  such  as their  complex  chemical  composition, 
inconsistent  formulation,  and  unstandardized  dosing, 
several  modifications  are proposed.  First,  the suspected 
site of the NPDI  (e.g.,  gut, liver,  and lungs)  should  inform 
the route  of administration  of the NP because  some  NPs 
may  be administered  by multiple  routes  (e.g.,  topically, 
orally,  and  inhaled).  Second,  a typical  consumer  dose  of 
the NP should  be used.  Third,  the NP should  be sourced 
carefully  in accordance  with  a previous  Recommended 
Approach,14 and the NP source,  genus,  species,  formula-
tion,  route  of administration,  and  measured  and  labeled 
concentration(s)  of constituent(s)  should  be reported. 
Finally,  all studies  should  have  pre- study  washout  periods 
during  which  participants  abstain  from  other  NPs,  includ-
ing fruit  juices  and  cannabis  products.  These  and  other 
proposed  modifications  detailed  in this  Recommended 
Approach  will enable  NP researchers  to determine  the ap-
propriate  type  of clinical  investigation  and follow  the rel-
evant established guidelines as closely as possible.
CONFLICT­OF­INTEREST
J.D.U.  is a paid  consultant  for Esperion  Therapeutics,  Inc. 
and Schrödinger,  Inc. and receives  financial  support  from 
Takeda,  Amgen,  Janssen,  and Gilead  for his University  of 
Washington  Research  Affiliate  Program  on Transporters 
(UWRAPT)  research.  E.J.C.  is a paid  medical  writer  for the 
Center  of Excellence  for Natural  Product  Drug  Interaction 
Research.  All other  authors  have  no conflicts  of interest 
to disclose.
REFERENCES
 1. Rashrash  M, Schommer  JC, Brown  LM.  Prevalence  and predic-
tors of herbal  medicine  use among  adults  in the United  States. 
J Patient Exp. 2017;4(3):108-  113.
 2. McCune  JS, Hatfield  AJ, Blackburn  AA,  Leith  PO, Livingston 
RB, Ellis  GK.  Potential  of chemotherapy-  herb  interactions  in 
adult  cancer  patients.  Support Care Cancer.  2004;12(6):454-  462.
 3. Boon  H, Kachan  N, Boecker  A. Use of natural  health  products: 
how  does  being  “natural ” affect  choice?  Med Decis Making. 
2013;33(2):282-  297.
 4. Tsui  T, Boon  H, Boecker  A, Kachan  N, Krahn  M. Understanding 
the  role  of scientific  evidence  in consumer  evaluation  of ­­­|­329
CLINICAL PHARMACOKINETIC NPDI STUDY DESIGN
natural  health  products  for osteoarthritis  an application  of 
the means  end chain  approach.  BMC Complement Altern Med. 
2012;12:198.
 5. Nicolussi  S, Drewe  J, Butterweck  V, Meyer  zu Schwabedissen 
HE.  Clinical  relevance  of St. John's  wort  drug  interactions  re-
visited. Br J Pharmacol. 2020;177(6):1212-  1226.
 6. Koziolek  M, Alcaro  S, Augustijns  P, et al. The  mechanisms  of 
pharmacokinetic  food-  drug  interactions  -   A perspective  from 
the UNGAP group. Eur J Pharm Sci. 2019;134:31-  59.
 7. FDA.  Clinical Drug Interaction Studies -  Cytochrome P450 
Enzyme-  and Transporter- Mediated Drug Interactions Guidance 
for Industry.  U.S.  Food  and Drug  Administration;  2020.  https://
www.fda.gov/media/  13458  1/download. Accessed July 5, 2021.
 8. FDA.  Drug Development and Drug Interactions: Table of 
Substrates, Inhibitors and Inducers.  U.S.  Food  and  Drug 
Administration;  2020.  https://www.fda.gov/drugs/  drug-  inter 
actio  ns- label  ing/drug-  devel  opmen  t- and-  drug-  inter  actio  ns- 
table  - subst  rates  - inhib  itors - and- inducers.  Accessed  July  5, 
2021.
 9. FDA.  In Vitro Drug Interaction Studies —  Cytochrome P450 
Enzyme-  and Transporter- Mediated Drug Interactions: Guidance 
for Industry.  U.S.  Food  and Drug  Administration;  2020.  https://
www.fda.gov/media/  13458  2/download. Accessed July 5, 2021.
 10.  EMA.  Guideline on the Investigation of Drug Interactions 
(CPMP/EWP/560/95/Rev. 1 Corr. 2).  Committee  for Human 
Medicinal  Products  (CHMP);  2012.  https://www.ema.europa.
eu/en/docum  ents/scien  tific - guide  line/guide  line-  inves  tigat ion- 
drug-  inter  actio  ns- revis  ion- 1_en.pdf. Accessed July 5, 2021.
 11.  Ministry  of Labor  and Welfare.  Guideline on Drug Interaction 
for Drug Development and Appropriate Provision of Information, 
Notification No.0723- 4, Pharmaceutical Evaluation Division, 
Pharmaceuticals Safety and Environmental Health Bureau, 
Japan.  Ministry  of Labor  and  Welfare;  2018.  https://www.
pmda.go.jp/files/  00022  8122.pdf. Accessed July 5, 2021.
 12.  Paine  MF,  Shen  DD,  McCune  JS. Recommended  approaches 
for  pharmacokinetic  natural  product-  drug  interaction  re-
search:  a NaPDI  center  commentary.  Drug Metab Dispos. 
2018;46(7):1041-  1045.
 13.  Johnson  EJ, González-  Peréz  V, Tian  DD,  et al. Selection  of pri-
ority  natural  products  for evaluation  as potential  precipitants 
of natural  product-  drug  interactions:  A NaPDI  center  recom-
mended approach. Drug Metab Dispos. 2018;46(7):1046-  1052.
 14.  Kellogg  JJ, Paine  MF,  McCune  JS, Oberlies  NH,  Cech  NB. 
Selection  and characterization  of botanical  natural  products  for 
research  studies:  a NaPDI  center  recommended  approach.  Nat 
Prod Rep. 2019;36(8):1196-  1221.
 15.  Cox  EJ, Tian  DD,  Clarke  JD, et al. Modeling  pharmacoki-
netic  natural  product-  drug  interactions  for decision-  making: 
a NaPDI  center  recommended  approach.  Pharmacol Rev. 
2021;73(2):847-  859. 16.  Ainslie  GR,  Wolf  KK,  Li Y, et al. Assessment  of a candidate 
marker  constituent  predictive  of a dietary  substance-  drug  in-
teraction:  case  study  with  grapefruit  juice  and  CYP3A4  drug 
substrates. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 2014;351(3):576-  584.
 17.  Tanna  RS, Tian  DD, Cech  NB, et al. Refined  prediction  of phar -
macokinetic  kratom-  drug  interactions:  time-  dependent  inhibi-
tion considerations. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 2021;376(1):64-  73.
 18.  Bansal  S, Maharao  N, Paine  MF,  Unadkat  JD. Predicting  the 
potential  for cannabinoids  to precipitate  pharmacokinetic  drug 
interactions  via reversible  inhibition  or inactivation  of major 
cytochromes P450. Drug Metab Dispos. 2020;48(10):1008-  1017.
 19.  Nguyen  JT, Tian  DD,  Tanna  RS, et al. Assessing  transporter- 
mediated  natural  product-  drug  interactions  via in vitro-  in vivo 
extrapolation:  clinical  evaluation  with  a probe  cocktail.  Clin 
Pharmacol Ther. 2021;109(5):1342-  1352.
 20.  Cox  EJ, Maharao  N, Patilea-  Vrana  G, et al. A marijuana-  drug 
interaction  primer:  Precipitants,  pharmacology,  and pharmaco -
kinetics. Pharmacol Ther. 2019;201:25-  38.
 21.  FDA.  Guidance  for industry,  investigators,  and  reviewers: 
Exploratory IND studies. 2006.
 22.  Johnson  EJ, Won  CS, Köck  K, Paine  MF.  Prioritizing  pharma-
cokinetic  drug  interaction  precipitants  in natural  products:  ap-
plication  to OATP  inhibitors  in grapefruit  juice.  Biopharm Drug 
Dispos. 2017;38(3):251-  259.
 23.  FDA.  Determining the Extent of Safety Data Collection Needed in 
Late Stage Premarket and Postapproval Clinical Investigations. 
U.S.  Food  and  Drug  Administration;  2016.  https://www.fda.
gov/media/  82664/  download. Accessed July 5, 2021.
 24.  Park  GJ, Bae SH, Park  WS,  et al. Drug-  drug  interaction  of mi-
crodose  and regular-  dose  omeprazole  with  a CYP2C19  inhibi-
tor and inducer. Drug Des Devel Ther. 2017;11:1043-  1053.
 25.  Wilson  ID,  Nicholson  JK.  Gut  microbiome  interactions 
with  drug  metabolism,  efficacy,  and  toxicity.  Transl Res. 
2017;179:204-  222.
 26.  Nichols  RG,  Peters  JM,  Patterson  AD.  Interplay  between  the 
host,  the human  microbiome,  and  drug  metabolism.  Hum 
Genomics. 2019;13(1):27.
How­to­cite­this­article: Cox EJ, Rettie AE, 
Unadkat JD, Thummel KE, McCune JS, Paine MF. 
Adapting regulatory drug-  drug interaction 
guidance to design clinical pharmacokinetic 
natural product-  drug interaction studies: A NaPDI 
Center recommended approach. Clin Transl Sci. 
2022;15:322–  329. https://doi.org/10.1111/cts.13172