Pharmacodynamic Drug-Drug Interactions
Jin Niu, Robert M. Straubinger , and Donald E. Mager*
Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, University at Buffalo, State University of New York, 
Buffalo, New York, USA
Abstract
Pharmacodynamic drug-drug interactions (DDIs) occur when the pharmacological effect of one 
drug is altered by that of another drug in a combination regimen. DDIs often are classified as 
synergistic, additive, or antagonistic in nature, albeit these terms are frequently misused. Within a 
complex pathophysiological system, the mechanism of interaction may occur at the same target or 
through alternate pathways. Quantitative evaluation of pharmacodynamic DDIs by employing 
modeling and simulation approaches is needed to identify and optimize safe and effective 
combination therapy regimens. This review investigates the opportunities and challenges in 
pharmacodynamic DDI studies, and highlights examples of quantitative methods for evaluating 
pharmacodynamic DDIs, with a particular emphasis on the use of mechanism-based modeling and 
simulation in DDI studies. Advancements in both experimental and computational techniques will 
enable the application of better, model-informed assessments of pharmacodynamic DDIs in drug 
discovery, development, and therapeutics.
Keywords
pharmacodynamics; drug interactions; modeling and simulation; mechanism-based modeling; 
quantitative systems pharmacology
Introduction
Drug-drug interactions (DDIs) occur when one drug alters the activity of another drug. Drug 
interactions may be both pharmacokinetic (PK) and pharmacodynamic (PD) in nature. In a 
recent assessment of DDIs from a de-identified electronic medical records system, 
prescribed pharmacotherapy regimens contained an average of 6.58 medications that had the 
potential to cause an average of 2.68 drug-drug interactions1. In contrast to PK interactions, 
which result from one drug altering the absorption, distribution, metabolism or elimination 
(ADME) of another, PD DDIs arise when the pharmacological effect of one drug is affected 
by that of another. PD DDIs are typically categorized as synergistic, additive, or 
antagonistic, although these terms are often used inappropriately. The definition of additivity 
is that the overall effect caused by a drug combination is the sum of the pharmacological 
*Donald E. Mager, PharmD, PhD, Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, University at Buffalo, SUNY , 431 Kapoor Hall, Buffalo, 
NY 14214; Tel: (716) 645-2903; dmager@buffalo.edu. 
Conflicts of Interest
The authors declared no competing interests for this work.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Clin Pharmacol Ther . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 June 01.
Published in final edited form as:
Clin Pharmacol Ther . 2019 June ; 105(6): 1395–1406. doi:10.1002/cpt.1434.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscripteffects of each individual agent in the combination. Synergy occurs when the overall effect 
of the drug combination is greater than additive, and antagonism occurs when the drug 
combination effect is less than additive. PD DDIs can be beneficial and employed 
deliberately, or adverse and unintended. For example, in cancer chemotherapy regimens, 
folinic acid is used in combination with 5-fluorouracil (5-FU) to enhance 5-FU inhibition of 
thymidylate synthase, resulting in synergistic cytotoxicity against cancer cells2. In a 
contrasting example, combining angiotensin converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors with 
thiazide diuretics for hypertension may cause excessive diuresis and hypotension3.
Compared to the relatively well-defined guidance for the evaluation of PK DDIs in drug 
development4, PD DDIs studies lack a formal paradigm for evaluation. This situation results 
partly from the fact that most PD DDI investigations are limited to high-throughput in vitro 
screening studies. They are less commonly tested in vivo , in animal models or clinical trials, 
in which complex, pathophysiological, systems-level interactions can occur. The lack of 
definitive investigation for PD DDIs in complex systems creates knowledge gaps and 
residual uncertainties as to the translational impact of PD DDIs identified during drug 
discovery and development. Mechanism-based- and quantitative systems pharmacology 
(QSP) modeling can be used to predict and design novel combinatorial regimens and to 
assess the clinical significance of PD interactions. Despite a lack of formal guidance, there is 
an increasing need for PD DDI studies employing enhanced mathematical modeling 
strategies to assist interpretation of data, guidance of future research, and clinical and 
regulatory decision making.
The need for pharmacodynamic drug-drug interaction studies
Combination therapies are used widely in areas such as infectious disease, cancer, and 
cardiovascular diseases. One successful example is the highly active antiretroviral therapy 
(HAART) combination treatment that is often prescribed to patients with human 
immunodeficiency virus (HIV) or Acquired Immuno-Deficiency Syndrome. HAART 
regimens were designed to achieve substantial suppression of viral load by 
pharmacologically inhibiting virus entry, reverse transcription, integration, gene 
transcription, and replication, and these multiple objectives were achieved using different 
classes of drugs5. In this example, PD DDI studies can elucidate how the different drugs 
affect the virus-host interactions alone and in combination, demonstrate how mathematical 
models can be used to optimize current regimens6,7 and assist in the design of new 
combination therapies to decrease mortality from HIV infection. Another example of the 
utility of PD interaction studies is the design of sequential regimens for cell cycle-dependent 
anti-cancer drugs. The sequence in which exposure to multiple chemotherapy drugs occurs 
can be important for achieving enhanced killing of cancer cells and/or reducing drug-
induced toxicity8. In one example, ex vivo  studies have shown that when leukocytes 
obtained from patients treated with a taxane (paclitaxel or docetaxel) were subsequently 
incubated in vitro  with a platinum agent (cisplatin), both cellular accumulation of cisplatin 
and the formation of platinum-DNA adducts decreased in these cells9. Moreover, clinical 
studies showed that patients experienced less hematopoietic toxicity when treated with 
paclitaxel/carboplatin compared to carboplatin alone8,10. However, tumor response rates 
were also lower in non-small-cell lung cancer patients receiving docetaxel before Niu et al. Page 2
Clin Pharmacol Ther . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 June 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscriptcarboplatin, compared to the reverse schedule11. No differences were found in the clearance 
of carboplatin or docetaxel with either administration schedule11. A possible explanation of 
these observations is that the platinum agents induce strong S-phase arrest and cytotoxicity, 
whereas the taxanes induce arrest in M-phase. By reducing the intracellular concentration of 
cisplatin, the taxane pre-treatment would reduce platinum-DNA adduct formation, and also 
reduce the toxicity of the platinum-DNA adducts when the cancer cells transition out of S-
phase into an M-phase block, and fail to exit mitosis in that cell cycle9. Another interesting 
example is that concurrent paclitaxel/carboplatin exposure, in contrast to sequential taxane/
platinum exposure, was found to enhance the formation of carboplatin-DNA adducts in 
bladder urothelial carcinoma cells12. Mechanism-based PD DDI studies, coupled with 
PK/PD modeling, could provide consistent mechanistic explanations for apparently 
contradictory findings obtained from different temporal drug regimen designs applied in 
different biological systems.
Mathematical modeling and simulation in PD DDI studies provides a quantitative 
framework to evaluate the design of therapeutic combinations or dosing regimens. With this 
strategy, the contribution of each drug in a combination can be quantified, e.g., by estimating 
the potency of individual drugs, and then the information on single drug effects can be used 
to determine whether a combination or temporally-optimized regimen adds clinical value. 
The characteristics of a pharmacodynamic DDI can be represented quantitatively in a model 
by including an empirical parameter that compares the observed magnitude of effect of a 
combination to the effect expected if the interaction were purely additive. With appropriate 
mechanistic, pathophysiological system models, the sources of DDIs can be investigated at 
the level of biological signaling and response pathways to provide greater insight into the 
mechanism(s) of PD interaction.
Challenges in PD DDI studies
One of the primary challenges in the assessment of PD DDIs is a lack of knowledge of the 
detailed mechanism(s) of action and exposure-response relationships for each drug 
individually. For example, after more than a century of use, the exact mechanisms of action 
for aspirin are still being identified13. Traditional chemotherapeutic agents that are not 
molecularly targeted to specific effector pathways tend to be promiscuous; they often exhibit 
non-specific pharmacological effects, which further complicates the prediction of PD DDIs 
based on first principles. However, ‘omics technologies combined with bioinformatics hold 
the potential for providing new insights into mechanisms of drug action, and PD DDI studies 
at a detailed molecular level can reveal new targets or pathways underlying the effects of 
established drugs14–16.
Biological systems are highly regulated networks that are rich in redundancies and feedback 
loops. DDIs may result from direct action of each agent at a pharmacological target, or the 
effect of one drug could be altered by another drug through interaction at any node within 
the larger network. Therefore, a consideration of the complexity of the biological or 
pathophysiological system is necessary to understand PD DDIs. For example, a solid tumor 
consists of malignant cancer cells that are often heterogeneous in their genetic mutational 
burden and activity of signal transduction pathways, and the tumor cells are enveloped in the Niu et al. Page 3
Clin Pharmacol Ther . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 June 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscriptsurrounding tumor microenvironment, which includes blood and lymphatic vessels, 
infiltrating immune cells, supporting stromal cells, and the extracellular matrix. All of these 
components interact with each other; the tumor-associated cellular components engage in 
autocrine and paracrine signaling networks, and interact with the extracellular matrix 
exerting its effects on tumor and stromal cell behavior17,18. In one example, a sequential 
regimen consisting of sustained EGFR inhibition by erlotinib, followed by the DNA-
damaging agent doxorubicin, sensitized a subset of triple-negative breast cancer cells to 
genotoxic drugs through rewiring of oncogenic signaling pathways19. However, 
simultaneous co-administration did not. One reasonable strategy for designing therapeutic 
combinations having enhanced efficacy would combine a chemotherapeutic agent with drugs 
that target the tumor microenvironment. Examples already investigated include drug 
combinations of angiogenesis inhibitors20 or immuno-oncology agents21 combined with 
chemotherapy. Signaling crosstalk within the tumor microenvironment is important for 
tumor progression, metastasis, and response to treatments17,18. However, the operant 
mechanisms of tumor-microenvironment crosstalk are not well elucidated, owing, in part, to 
limited experimental methods for quantifying the spatiotemporal dynamics of inter- and 
intracellular signaling networks in each cell type, i.e., for determining how the 
concentrations of molecular components change as a function of time and cellular location. 
Single-cell technologies may provide an improved platform for exploring mechanisms of 
cell-cell communication and provide clues as to the existence of important signaling 
networks affecting concentration- and time-dependent responses in cell populations22. 
Improved characterization of the complex interplay between drugs and biological systems 
will help identify new targets of beneficial PD DDI and inspire novel combinatorial 
regimens.
Although knowledge of beneficial PD DDIs could be used to optimize therapeutic outcomes, 
they are tested infrequently in animal models and clinical trials. The practical considerations 
in the design and evaluation of DDIs empirically include both feasibility and cost. Even in 
preclinical studies, such studies typically require assessment of multiple dose levels for each 
drug, alone and in different combination ratios23. Additionally, the evaluation of PD DDIs 
often relies on target- or mechanism-based PD biomarker(s) that reflect the mechanisms of 
action and intended activities of the drugs. Unlike diagnostic, prognostic, or predictive 
biomarkers, a target-based biomarker may not be indicative of clinically meaningful 
effects24,25. This limits the utility of some biomarkers in clinical research, and can result in a 
lack of reliable measurements for evaluating PD DDIs. In general, both target- and 
mechanism-based PD biomarkers are important for decision making, particularly for early 
clinical development of targeted cancer therapies. For example, in a phase II study of 
patients with metastatic colorectal cancer, phosphorylated EGFR (Epidermal Growth Factor 
Receptor) and phosphorylated ERK (Extracellular Signal-Regulated Kinase) in tumor tissues 
served as PD biomarkers, and the trial observed that they were reduced significantly in 
response to erlotinib, an EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitor26. A typical clinical question is 
whether a new combination is better than the current standard of care, and studies of this 
nature often do not address directly the existence or nature of any underlying PD DDIs. 
However, the evaluation of PD DDIs ought not to be overlooked in clinical drug 
development, because greater insight into mechanisms of drug action could be used to Niu et al. Page 4
Clin Pharmacol Ther . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 June 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscriptdesign drug combinations having improved efficacy and/or reduced toxicity. Coupling 
mechanism-based models and appropriate quantitative translational techniques with the 
investigation of clinically meaningful PD response biomarkers is an approach that could 
reduce the numbers of animals, patients, or reduce treatment cohorts required in PD DDI 
drug combination studies, so that they become cost-effective for investigation.
Quantification methods for PD DDIs
A broad spectrum of mathematical modeling approaches has been used to understand PD 
DDIs (Figure 1). Empirical models are more common for in vitro  screening, and receptor 
binding models can be used to determine whether interactions are synergistic, additive, or 
antagonistic. Such empirical assessments are used less frequently when PD evaluations 
transition to animal and clinical studies. At the in vitro -in vivo  interface, conceptual- and 
physiologically-based PK/PD models play a greater role in characterizing the responses to 
combination regimens. Notably, quantitative systems pharmacology models can be used 
across all phases, scales, and biological systems, and can be used in a complimentary 
manner with both empirical and mechanism-based PK/PD models to provide greater insights 
into the mechanisms of PD DDIs.
Empirical evaluations
PD DDIs are more commonly studied with in vitro  screens that seek to identify drug 
combinations having increased efficacy. For example, the NCI ALMANAC (A Large Matrix 
of Anti-Neoplastic Agent Combinations) study screened more than 5000 pairs of 2-drug 
combinations in 60 well-characterized human cancer cell lines27. This study applied a metric 
called the “ComboScore” to evaluate the nature of the interactions. The ComboScore was 
calculated as the sum of the difference between the expected versus  observed cell growth 
fractions (Eq 1). The expected growth was assumed to conform to one of two conditions: (i) 
as low as the remaining cell number after cells were exposed to the more cytotoxic drug, or 
(ii) would equal the product of the two unaffected cell growth fractions in response to the 
two cytostatic agents (Eq. 3).
ComboScoreiAB=∑p,qPrediApBq−ObsiApBqEq 1
ObsiApBq= 100 ×T1ApBq−T0
T10−T0Eq 2Niu et al. Page 5
Clin Pharmacol Ther . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 June 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author ManuscriptPrediApBq=min(ObsiAp,ObsiBq),if ObsiAp≤ 0or ObsiBq≤ 0
1
100ObsiAp×ObsiBqotherwiseEq 3
Obsl= min Obsi, 100 Eq 4
with PrediApBq representing the expected growth fraction of the ith cell line exposed to the pth 
concentration of drug A and qth concentration of drug B; ObsiApBq represents the observed 
growth fraction under the same conditions; T0 is the time zero endpoint measurement of 
total cell number; T1ApBq represents the endpoint measurement after 2-day drug exposure; T10
represents the endpoint measurement for the untreated control group after 2 days; ObsiAp and 
ObsiBq represent the observed growth fractions when exposed to drug A or drug B 
individually, and each is capped at 100 so that the effect of apparent drug stimulation of 
growth is neglected. A positive ComboScore indicates greater-than-additive activity, whereas 
a negative score suggests less-than-additive activity. This comprehensive screening study 
identified 1898 drug pairs having greater-than-additive activity in at least one cell line, and 
concluded that some combinations could be promising for further evaluation in tumor 
xenograft models and clinical trials.
In a fashion similar to the ALMANAC project, numerous in vitro  screening studies are 
conducted to evaluate the potential of drugs for stimulation or inhibition of enzyme 
activities, microorganisms, or cancer cells. The first step in conducting a PD DDI study is 
the quantitative assessment of single-agent effects. The Hill or sigmoidal E max function is 
used widely to characterize the dose- or concentration-response curve for each drug 
individually. For example, the expression of an inhibitory Hill equation is:
R=R0×1 −Imax×Cγ
Cγ+IC50γ,Eq 5
with R as the outcome ( e.g., the number of live cells remaining in response to a cytotoxic 
drug), R0 is the outcome in the control group, C is the drug concentration, Imax represents 
the inhibition capacity of the drug, which ranges from 0 to 1, IC50 is the drug concentration 
producing 50% of Imax, and γ is the Hill coefficient that governs the steepness of the 
concentration-response curve. The fraction of unaffected cells remaining after drug exposure 
(fu), compared to a vehicle control group, is a typical endpoint measured in cell proliferation 
assays. It can be derived as:Niu et al. Page 6
Clin Pharmacol Ther . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 June 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscriptfu=R
R0= 1 −Imax×Cγ
Cγ+IC50γ= 1 −Imax×C
IC50γ
C
IC50γ
+ 1.Eq 6
After quantitative characterization of single-drug effects, the second step is to evaluate the 
drugs in combination. There exist various approaches to this assessment; the fundamental 
process is to compare the outcome of a reference treatment with the null hypothesis, 
expecting no interaction, ( i.e., additive interaction). The most widely accepted functions to 
define “no interaction” are Loewe additivity28 and Bliss independence29. These two methods 
differ in their underlying assumptions, and there is no consensus as to which reference 
method is superior overall. Loewe additivity assumes the drugs have similar mechanisms of 
action, or compete for the same binding site30. As such, this method is recommended when 
two drugs share the same Imax and γ, and differ only in their IC50 values ( i.e., have parallel 
concentration-response curves)31. The prediction of the unaffected cell growth fraction from 
Loewe additivity can be expressed as:
fu, 1 + 2= 1 −Imax×C1
IC50, 1+C2
IC50, 2γ
C1
IC50, 1+C2
IC50, 2γ
+ 1,Eq 7
with C1 and C2 representing the concentrations of drugs 1 and 2 in a combination that 
achieve 50% of Imax, (i.e., 50% of the inhibition of cell proliferation compared to untreated 
controls), and IC50,1 and IC50,2 represent the concentrations of drugs 1 and 2 as single 
agents that are required to achieve growth inhibition that is 50% of Imax. The combination 
index ( CI)27, which can reflect the nature of a DDI, is defined as:
CI=C1
IC50, 1+C2
IC50, 2,Eq 8
A CI less than 1 indicates synergy, and values larger than 1 suggest antagonism. Loewe 
additivity can be visualized using an isobologram, as shown in Figure 2A. If the 
combination that achieves 50% inhibition is plotted as a point (C1
IC50, 1,C2
IC50, 2), and this point 
lies below the Loewe additivity line (a straight line that connects (C1
IC50, 1, 0) and (0,C2
IC50, 2)), 
then the combination is Loewe synergistic. If the point lies above the Loewe additivity line, 
it is antagonistic. In a special case, if C1 and C2 are concentrations of the same drug, then 
Loewe additivity predicts that the response to the combination of C1 and C2 equals the 
response to this drug at the concentration of C1 + C2.Niu et al. Page 7
Clin Pharmacol Ther . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 June 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author ManuscriptBliss independence assumes independent mechanisms of drug action, or a non-competitive 
interaction32, such that the combined outcome equals the product of the outcome from each 
drug alone. It is expressed as:
fu, 1 + 2=fu, 1×fu, 2=1 −Imax, 1×C1
IC50, 1γ1
C1
IC50, 1γ1
+ 1×1 −Imax, 2×C2
IC50, 2γ2
C2
IC50, 2γ2
+ 1.Eq 9
and when Imax,1 = Imax,2 = 1 then
fu, 1 + 2= 1 −C1
IC50, 1γ1
+C2
IC50, 2γ2
+C1
IC50, 1γ1
×C2
IC50, 2γ2
1 +C1
IC50, 1γ1
+C2
IC50, 2γ2
+C1
IC50, 1γ1
×C2
IC50, 2γ2.Eq 10
Thus, the CI for Bliss independence is:
CIBl=C1
IC50, 1γ1
+C2
IC50, 2γ2
+C1
IC50, 1γ1
×C2
IC50, 2γ2
.Eq 11
If the observed unaffected growth fraction (e.g., the number of proliferating cells after 
treatment compared to untreated control) is less than the predicted unaffected fraction fu,1+2, 
then the interaction is considered Bliss synergistic. If the observed unaffected fraction is 
greater than predicted, the interaction is antagonistic. The Bliss independence method can be 
applied to drugs that have non-parallel concentration-response curves ( e.g., different Imax 
and/or γ values). In contrast to the straight Loewe additivity line, when the Bliss 
independence line is plotted on an isobologram, it may have various shapes depending on 
the values of γ1 and γ233. Two examples of Bliss independent combinations on an 
isobologram are shown in Figure 2B (with Imax,1 = Imax,2 = 1 and γ1 = γ2 = 1) and in Figure 
2C (with Imax,1 = Imax,2 = 1, γ1 = 0.5 and γ2 = 1). Paradoxically, if C1 and C2 are different 
concentrations of the same drug, then the Bliss independence method may predict an 
outcome in response to the combination of C1 and C2 that is different from the additive case 
of C1 + C2. The general reference model used in the ALMANAC project27 was a modified 
version of the Bliss independence model.
A direct comparison of experimental observations with a prediction based on the assumption 
of no theoretical interaction could yield a conclusion of synergy or antagonism. However, a 
non-interaction prediction relies solely on the single-agent concentration-response curves, 
and neglects all information obtained from observation of the outcomes of combination 
treatments. To utilize data for both single and combined agents, Greco and colleagues Niu et al. Page 8
Clin Pharmacol Ther . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 June 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscriptproposed a universal response surface approach to fit all data simultaneously33. An 
interaction term (e.g., α or ψ) is introduced to quantify the interaction in the combination 
group(s). This method is flexible and can be used to characterize Loewe additivity, Bliss 
independence, and other interaction models. For example, the application to Loewe 
additivity with parallel concentration-response curves can be expressed as:
1 =C1
IC50, 1×1 −fu, 1 + 2
Imax+fu, 1 + 2− 11/γ+C2
IC50, 2×1 −fu, 1 + 2
Imax+fu, 1 + 2− 11/γ
+αC1C2
IC50, 1IC50, 2×1 −fu, 1 + 2
Imax+fu, 1 + 2− 11/γ,Eq 12
in which a positive α value indicates Loewe synergism and a negative value indicates 
antagonism. The extension of the response surface method to Bliss independence or non-
competitive interaction34 can be expressed as:
fu, 1 + 2=1 −Imax, 1×C1
IC50, 1γ1
C1
IC50, 1γ1
+ 1×1 −Imax, 2×C2
IC50, 2×ψγ2
C2
IC50, 2×ψγ2
+ 1,Eq 13
with a ψ value less than 1 indicating Bliss synergism, and a value greater than 1 indicating 
antagonism. An illustration of a synergistic interaction between two drugs identified by the 
response surface method assuming Bliss independence is shown in Figure 3. The principles 
of the response surface method also can be applied to indirect response models35, and 
additional detailed mathematical expressions have been described36. Zhu and colleagues 
used the response surface method in conjunction with an indirect response model of cell 
growth kinetics37 in a study of pancreatic cancer cells exposed to the combination of 
gemcitabine, a cytotoxic agent, and birinapant, a pro-apoptotic SMAC (Second 
Mitochondria-derived Activator of Caspases) mimetic. The analysis identified synergistic 
inhibition of cell growth and synergistic induction of cell death as the drug interaction 
mechanisms.
Another important aspect of PD DDIs is the analysis of temporal interactions between drugs, 
in which the sequential exposure to drugs may elicit a greater or lesser response as compared 
with simultaneous treatment. The response surface method can be extended to compare drug 
interactions in different sequential combination regimens. For example, an additional 
parameter, μ, can be introduced into Eq 13 as:Niu et al. Page 9
Clin Pharmacol Ther . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 June 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscriptfu, 1 + 2=1 −Imax, 1×C1
IC50, 1γ1
C1
IC50, 1γ1
+ 1×1 −Imax, 2×C2
IC50, 2×ψ×μγ2
C2
IC50, 2×ψ×μγ2
+ 1,Eq 14
to characterize the temporal interaction in a sequential dosing regimen compared to 
simultaneous exposure38. A μ value less than 1 indicates a synergistic inhibition when drugs 
are given in a specific order compared to simultaneous exposure. This method was used to 
demonstrate that a sequence of bortezomib exposure for 24 hours, followed by vorinostat for 
an additional 24 hours, resulted in synergistic cytotoxic effects against the U266 human 
multiple myeloma cell line38.
There are numerous other methods available to characterize PD drug interactions in an 
empirical manner. For example, Jilek and colleagues defined “Degree of Independence” (DI) 
as the ratio of the difference between experimental observations and predicted Loewe 
additivity versus  the difference between Bliss independence and Loewe additivity. For 
example, DI=FE−FL
FB−FL, where F represents the logarithmic measure of inhibition: log [(1 − 
fu) / fu], and E, B, and L represent experimental observation, Bliss independence, and 
Loewe additivity. This approach was applied to analyze combinations of anti-HIV drugs 
from different classes6. Zhao and colleagues derived expressions of “zero-interactivity” for 
different types of nonparallel concentration-response relationships, added the experimental 
uncertainties to form an “Uncertainty Envelope”, and compared the predicted range of this 
reference envelope to observations31. Zimmer and colleagues modified the Bliss 
independence technique by applying a concentration-dependent, Michaelis–Menten-like 
term on the effective concentration of each drug39. Some of these methods sought to provide 
new metrics that included statistical assessments of PD DDI studies31, and others were 
developed to characterize interactions in drug combinations of higher dimensionality than 
pairs of drugs6,39.
A common drawback of empirical methods for evaluating the nature of DDIs is that it is 
difficult to predict whether the interactions identified from studying 2-drug pairs are relevant 
to combinations of 3 or more drugs. For example, Molins and Jusko conducted a 
comprehensive evaluation of interactions among gemcitabine, paclitaxel, and trifluoperazine 
in pancreatic cancer cells, and found that the overall interaction to the 3-drug combination 
ranged from additive to synergistic, despite an apparent antagonism between the paclitaxel 
and trifluoperazine pair40. In another example, Zimmer and colleagues found a hierarchy of 
interactions among antibiotics, and accurately predicted the DDIs in six triplet- and two 
quadruplet combinations39. However, mechanisms of drug interaction(s) may differ among 
2-drug pairs, and this is not considered in the empirical methods. Therefore, it may be 
implausible to search for a universal empirical method to predict DDIs accurately in higher 
dimensional combinations based solely on analysis of drug pairs.Niu et al. Page 10
Clin Pharmacol Ther . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 June 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author ManuscriptIn order to apply the empirical methods, high-throughput screening often is employed to 
provide rich datasets that capture concentration-response relationships for drugs as single 
agents and combined in different concentration ratios, and this rich data enables robust 
predictions as to the nature of drug interaction. However, when testing the efficacy of drug 
combinations in animal models or in patients, it is not feasible to obtain such rich data. More 
frequently, the clinical question is simply whether a combination is better than a single 
agent. In such situations, the limited data does not allow for robust testing of the nature of 
the drug interaction, nor for making projections of optimal exposures. This represents a 
major shortcoming of empirical modeling of DDIs, and makes the case for alternative 
approaches for DDI investigation that can bridge the preclinical-clinical interface, such as 
mechanism-based and systems pharmacology modeling.
In smaller-scale studies, such as is common in animal-based- or clinical research , the terms 
“additive” and “synergistic” are often misused23. Frequently they are used to describe an 
“enhancement” of effect suggested by a statistically greater response to a drug combination 
as compared to monotherapy. The misuse of “synergy” is especially common in oncology 
studies when tumor volume- or survival responses to a combination are compared to 
monotherapy or standard-of-care. The beneficial effect of a combination regimen can be the 
result of (i) pharmacodynamic interactions that are indeed additive or synergistic, or (ii) 
independent drug action without interactions, in which a patient responds to either drug as a 
single agent, and so the combination provides a greater probability of effective treatment41. 
Independent drug action and patient-to-patient variability in drug responsiveness can explain 
many of the combination benefits in cancer clinical trials and in xenograft models, with 
relatively few exceptions in which the combination therapy benefit exceeds independent 
drug action, and appears to exert additivity or synergy41. The usual analysis approaches for 
analyzing independent drug action include the highest single agent (HSA) method42 or 
Gaddum’s non-interaction43. By definition, these methods assume that the expected 
combination effect is the maximum or the best of the single-agent responses at equivalent 
concentrations. The HSA method is useful when a single drug dose is tested, and the same 
dose is used in the drug combination.
Mechanism-based PK/PD Modeling
Whereas empirical methods are useful for analyzing screening studies and identifying 
promising combinations for future testing, they do not provide insights into the mechanisms 
of action or interaction among drugs in a combination. Therefore, it is difficult to translate 
empirically-identified interactions directly to pre-clinical or clinical settings. In contrast, 
mechanism-based PK/PD models can characterize quantitatively the single-agent- and 
combined effects of drugs upon physiological or pathological systems. Modeling and 
simulations based on a mechanistic PK/PD model offer opportunities to compare different 
dosing regimens in patient populations and subpopulations, translate results across the stages 
of drug research and development, and explain non-intuitive treatment effects observed with 
combination therapies. For example, when ibuprofen was administered daily with aspirin, 
the aspirin-mediated inhibition of platelet aggregation was reported to be blocked44. The 
mechanism of this antagonistic interaction was characterized quantitatively using a nonlinear 
mixed effect (population) model that included the turnover of the drug target Niu et al. Page 11
Clin Pharmacol Ther . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 June 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscriptcyclooxygenase-1 (COX-1) according to a zero-order rate constant for COX-1 production 
and a first-order process for its degradation (Figure 4)45. In the model, aspirin induces a 
second-order, concentration-dependent, irreversible inhibition of COX-1. Ibuprofen is 
assumed to form a complex with COX-1 through reversible binding. A key mechanism was 
the assumption that the ibuprofen/COX-1 complex is protected from aspirin-induced 
inactivation. Platelet aggregation was modeled as being (i) proportional to total COX-1 
enzyme content and (ii) regulated by ibuprofen. Simulations with the model showed that 
regular co-administration of aspirin and ibuprofen, or administration of ibuprofen 2 hrs 
before aspirin, would compromise the anti-platelet function of aspirin. This mechanism-
based PK/PD model thus provided a quantitative basis for recommending only intermittent 
administration of ibuprofen (or other NSAIDs) in order to preserve the anti-platelet function 
of aspirin.
The treatment of antimicrobial infections is a therapeutic area that relies on multi-drug 
combinations, and mechanism-based PK/PD modeling has been used to optimize 
combinatorial antibiotic regimens. Bulitta and colleagues developed a mechanism-based 
model to describe the anti-bacterial effects of tobramycin, an aminoglycoside antibiotic, on a 
clinical isolate of Pseudomonas aeruginosa46. The bacterial population was defined as a 
mixture of 3 subpopulations having different susceptibilities to the antibiotic. Two 
mechanisms of tobramycin-induced killing were included: (i) immediate killing as a result 
of bacterial outer membrane disruption, and (ii) delayed killing resulting from the synthesis 
of bacterial lethal protein. This model was adapted subsequently for other Gram-negative 
bacteria such as Acinetobacter baumannii47 and used to characterize the synergistic 
interaction between β-lactam antibiotics (imipenem or meropenem) and aminoglycosides 
(tobramycin or gentamicin)48–50. The synergy was concluded to arise from enhanced 
penetration of the β-lactam to its molecular target site as a result of outer membrane 
disruption by the aminoglycosides. A PD DDI model, based on the in vitro  evaluation of 
bacterial killing using a hollow-fiber infection model system51, was translated in vivo  to a 
murine thigh infection model52 and to patients53 simply by integrating the PK models of the 
antibiotics in those species. Simulations with the PK/PD model suggested that the 
continuous infusion of a high-dose β-lactam combined with an aminoglycoside would 
constitute a promising regimen for optimal bacterial killing without regrowth. Simulations 
with the model were also used to optimize the dosing regimen in patients having altered 
renal clearance and atypical PK profiles54.
PK/PD modeling can be applied successfully to the PD DDIs that occur when a drug 
interacts with both endogenous substances and complex physiological control systems that 
have been perturbed by pathological processes. For example, diabetes medications are given 
in an attempt to normalize glucose concentrations, which can vary significantly owing to 
food intake and the endogenous, disease-altered glucose-insulin system. Silber and 
colleagues developed an integrated model for the glucose-insulin system in both healthy 
volunteers and patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM)55, in which plasma glucose 
concentrations are controlled by insulin-mediated changes in glucose production and 
elimination. In the model, insulin secretion is controlled by glucose concentrations in plasma 
and at the absorption site. Using this model along with meal tolerance test data, the primary 
mechanism of action of glibenclamide and its metabolites was identified as increasing Niu et al. Page 12
Clin Pharmacol Ther . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 June 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscriptinsulin secretion56. The model was extended to include glucagon dynamics and to 
characterize the effects of the glucokinase activator LY2599506. In the model, glucagon, 
together with insulin and glucose, regulates hepatic glucose production, and LY2599506 
both inhibits hepatic glucose production and promotes the production of insulin57. The effect 
of exogenous glucose and protein intake (meal ingestion) was also examined after 
LY2599506 administration. Although these models characterized well the short-term effects 
of drugs interacting with the glucose-insulin-glucagon system, the long-term progression of 
T2DM must be managed for effective treatment of the disease. Winter and colleagues 
developed a model to characterize the long-term effects of pioglitazone, metformin, and 
gliclazide on T2DM disease progression58 that included the homeostatic feedback 
relationships between fasting plasma glucose (FPG) and fasting serum insulin (FSI), as well 
as the physiological feed-forward relationship between FPG and glycosylated hemoglobin 
A1c (HbA1c). Simulations with the model showed that β-cell function is decreased 
gradually by long-term treatment with gliclazide, but is increased by pioglitazone. Choy and 
colleagues extended this model to incorporate the effect of body weight on insulin 
sensitivity59, and demonstrated that weight management, with diet and exercise that 
decreased body weight by 4.1 kg, was associated with a 30.1% increase in insulin sensitivity. 
These pharmacodynamic models for T2DM highlight the importance of using suitable 
mathematical frameworks to represent the mechanisms of drug interactions with complex 
physiological/pathological systems.
Similar to diabetes, cancer is a complex system pathophysiology consisting of malignant 
cells, the tumor microenvironment (including the vasculature and lymphatic systems), the 
immune system, supporting stromal cells, the extracellular matrix, and complex 
communications among these components17. Targeting multiple elements in the tumor 
microenvironment is a strategy for combination cancer therapy, as well as an emerging field 
for DDI studies. Several mechanism-based PK/PD models have been developed to 
investigate combination treatment strategies in such pathophysiological systems. For 
example, Hahnfeldt and colleagues proposed a mathematical model to describe the dynamics 
of tumor growth under angiogenic control60, using a lung cancer xenograft model system 
treated with the angiogenic inhibitors endostatin, angiostatin, and TNP-470. In the model, 
the maximal tumor volume ( V) is limited by the vascular carrying capacity ( K):
dV
dt= − λ1×V×logV
K
dK
dt=f(V,K,t),Eq 15
where λ1 is the first-order tumor growth rate constant, and K is determined by the tumor 
angiogenic effect, the existing vasculature, and exogenous angiogenesis inhibitors. When 
tumor volume V is less than capacity K, dV
dt is greater than 0, the tumor grows. Conversely, 
when V is greater than K, the tumor shrinks. Hutchinson and colleagues modified this model 
to investigate the temporal characteristics of vessel normalization after bevacizumab or 
vanucizumab treatment in a breast cancer xenograft model61 . Simulations showed that the Niu et al. Page 13
Clin Pharmacol Ther . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 June 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscripteffects of chemotherapy were enhanced greatly if chemotherapy was administered during a 
discrete time window of vessel normalization. Imbs and colleagues used this model to 
predict successfully that a regimen having a 3-day gap between bevacizumab treatment and 
pemetrexed-cisplatin administration would result in better tumor control compared to a 
regimen having an 8-day-gap62. These proof-of-concept cases demonstrate the utility of 
quantitative PK/PD DDI models of tumor-microenvironment interaction to optimize dosing 
regimens.
Tumor-microenvironment crosstalk also plays a role in drug resistance63. Picco and 
colleagues investigated intrinsic- and environment-mediated drug resistance (EMDR) in 
BRAF-mutated melanoma xenografts, and proposed a mathematical model that 
characterized the DDI between a stroma-targeted FAK (focal adhesion kinase) inhibitor and 
a tumor-targeted BRAF inhibitor (BRAFi)64. The model features two subpopulations of 
tumor cells that are either sensitive or resistant to the BRAFi, and two subpopulations of 
stromal cells that are either normal or activated. In the model, the activated stroma induces 
EMDR by stimulating the proliferation of resistant tumor cells. The BRAFi inhibits the 
proliferation of drug-sensitive tumor cells, and also stimulates stromal activation. The FAKi 
counters these effects by inhibiting the EMDR effect. Tumor growth data from both cell 
culture- and xenograft studies were obtained to identify the contribution of intrinsic- vs. 
environment-mediated drug resistance pathways. Simulations based on the model suggested 
that the optimal drug regimen would be to administer the BRAFi with a 1-day-on/2-day-off 
schedule, whereas the FAKi should be administered continuously. A binary function was 
used in this example to model the effect of both the BRAF and FAK inhibitors. However, 
this function could be replaced by one representing the duration over which drug 
concentrations remained above effective concentrations, which could be identified 
experimentally from dose-response relationships and PK information.
Tumor-immune system interactions have garnered increasing attention because immuno-
oncology therapies, such as adoptive T cell transfer and immune checkpoint inhibitors, show 
promising anti-cancer treatment effects65. Kirschner and Panett applied a mathematical 
model to characterize the dynamic interactions between tumor cells (T) and immune-effector 
cells (E), along with the influence of the cytokine interleukin-2 (IL-2, IL)66. The effector 
cells in the model represent activated immune cells, such as cytotoxic T-cells and natural 
killer cells that are recruited by tumor antigenicity (represented by c, below, which is 
proportional to the tumor mass) and are stimulated to proliferate by IL-2. The stimulation by 
IL-2 was described by a saturable process having a maximum proliferation rate constant of 
p1 and a Michaelis constant g 1. Tumor cells are eliminated by the immune effector cells 
according to Michaelis–Menten kinetics, and IL-2 is secreted when the effector cells are 
stimulated by the tumor, also with Michaelis–Menten kinetics.Niu et al. Page 14
Clin Pharmacol Ther . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 June 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author ManuscriptEq 16
In this model, tumor proliferation is described by the logistic function, and the degradation 
of both immune effector cells and IL-2 follow first-order processes. This model establishes a 
quantitative foundation for the assessment of IL-2 treatment influence upon adoptive cell 
transfer. Several other models have been developed to investigate the combination of 
chemotherapy and/or radiotherapy with different types of immunotherapies67–69, and the use 
of mathematical models to explore approaches to overcome the challenges of cancer 
immunotherapy has been reviewed recently70. Owing to the complexity of the immune 
system, many of the models incorporate various immune cell types, along with inter- and 
intracellular signaling pathways in both tumor and immune cells. QSP approaches (below) 
are particularly useful in handling these types of complex dynamic interplay. For example, 
Kosinsky and colleagues developed a QSP model to characterize the synergy between 
radiation and anti-PD-1/PD-L1 therapy, and to optimize the administration sequences and 
schedules of the agents in this combination71.
Quantitative systems pharmacology models
QSP modeling is a relatively new tool in drug discovery and development, and in regulatory 
science72. Through mathematical modeling, QSP models can integrate and recapitulate the 
fundamental interactions in biological systems, simulate drug activity as perturbations of 
those systems, and evaluate drug effects within the context of the properties of the system, 
such as steady states, stability, and limits73. QSP can connect network-based system 
modeling with basic PK/PD principles74, and is enabled by “big data” technologies such as 
genomics, proteomics, and other ‘omics platforms75. QSP approaches can facilitate PD DDI 
studies by mapping the mechanisms of interaction of a combination onto the relevant 
physiological system(s), generating hypothetical combinations to achieve defined outcomes 
through simulations of different target perturbations, and integrating knowledge from 
different scales or informational sources for translational purposes.
Various methods are used by in QSP modeling, ranging from bioinformatics and data mining 
to logic-based- and differential equation-based models for characterizing system-specific 
spatiotemporal dynamics. QSP models for studying PD DDIs often are fit for the purpose of 
designing or optimizing a new drug combination to achieve a desired outcome, or to identify 
the source(s) of an observed PD interaction. For example, a logic-based Boolean network 
model was developed to represent a key signaling network in multiple myeloma cells76 and 
minimal intervention analysis was conducted to identify potential 2- and 3-drug Niu et al. Page 15
Clin Pharmacol Ther . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 June 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscriptcombinations to achieve apoptosis77. This is a “bottom-up” strategy to build models based 
on knowledge of intracellular signal transduction pathways. In an integrated example, Zhu 
and colleagues discovered a synergistic interaction between the SMAC mimetic birinapant 
and the cytotoxic gemcitabine in pancreatic cancer cells37, used bioinformatic analyses of 
quantitative proteomic data78 to identify a drug interaction at the level of DNA damage 
response and repair pathways, and developed a multiscale model to integrate the protein- 
and pathway dynamics with cell cycle progression and cell growth kinetics (Figure 5)15. The 
interaction of birinapant and gemcitabine was attributed to birinapant blocking the 
gemcitabine-induced protein ATM (Ataxia-Telangiectasia Mutated), PP5 (Protein 
Phosphatases 5) and PP2CB (Protein Phosphatases 2A Beta), and also to mediating the 
degradation of cIAP1/2 (Cellular Inhibitor of Apoptosis Protein 1/2) and gemcitabine-
induced FasL (Fas Ligand). The protein expression changes propagated temporally through 
the signaling transduction network so as to perturb the cell cycle and result in apparent 
synergy15,37. Sensitivity analysis suggested that a key protein to inhibit cell growth was 
RFC1 (Replication Factor C Subunit 1), and the model predicted that a sequential regimen of 
24h pre-treatment with gemcitabine first, followed by birinapant exposure, would produce 
considerably greater tumor cell growth inhibition compared to simultaneous drug 
exposure15. This hypothesis was then experimentally validated37.
QSP models have made considerable progress in understanding and predicting PD DDIs. 
However, standards and best practices are critical for model development and validation 
owing to the complexity and flexibility in building QSP models79–81. Currently, there is no 
consensus on systematic approaches for exploring parameter space and increasing 
confidence in model predictions.
Prospectus
Drug discovery and development is evolving from the ‘one-drug/one-target/one-disease 
process’ paradigm toward identifying “sweet spots” or the key nexuses of interaction at 
which to intervene in order to restore pathophysiological systems. By integrating QSP 
analysis with physiologically-based pharmacokinetic (PBPK) models, multiscale modeling 
could predict potential PD DDIs, and, via clinical trial simulations, create testable 
hypotheses as to their potential clinical significance. PD DDI studies can leverage “big data” 
to identify novel targets and/or covariates for drug interactions, evaluate the strength of DDIs 
in patients of different genetic/environment backgrounds, and help select the “right” patients 
for clinical trials. In one example, machine-learning algorithms have been used to predict 
DDIs for adverse reactions by integrating drug phenotypic, therapeutic, chemical, and 
genomic properties82. In a second example, the use of machine-learning, QSP, and PK/PD 
modeling techniques to integrate genomic and transcriptomic data with experimental studies 
of patient-derived, induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSC), which can recapitulate the inter-
individual variabilities in clinical drug responses of their donors, resulted in the 
identification of genomic predictors of adverse drug reactions83. This new paradigm can be 
applied to expand PD DDI studies by utilizing rich information sources such as electronic 
health records, and in this way, patients potentially could be selected based on their 
genomic/transcriptomic/proteomic susceptibility to DDIs before combination therapies are 
administered.Niu et al. Page 16
Clin Pharmacol Ther . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 June 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author ManuscriptA PD DDI study can be implemented in clinical settings with proper design and assessment 
methods, and this would address the problem that clinical studies are too costly to be 
designed based upon empirical discovery of potentially beneficial PD DDIs. Adequate 
evidence for clinically-significant PD DDIs should be obtained before a clinical trial. First, 
the hypothesis generation step for candidate combinations would be performed and 
hypotheses tested in silico  or with in vitro  screening studies. Subsequently, a detailed 
investigation of the mechanism(s) of suspect PD DDIs in the combination would be 
conducted, and PD DDI mechanisms would be represented by a QSP model that has been 
properly calibrated and qualified. PBPK modeling that predicts the physiological 
concentrations of drugs at target site(s) would be integrated with the QSP model to predict in 
vivo exposure-response relationships for each drug individually vs. combined. Regimens 
then would be optimized toward the desired outcome(s) in terms of the dose and schedule 
design, and “proof-of-concept” animal studies could be used for parameter calibration and 
model validation purposes. Translational PK/PD models, based on either PBPK or allometric 
relationships, could be used for projections in humans84. Eventually, the derived model 
could be used to generate clinical simulations that include considerations of model- and 
clinical uncertainties. Employing this paradigm, only one treatment combination (or a small 
number of combinations) that was predicted to result in significantly altered clinical 
endpoints compared to single-drug treatments would require clinical testing. Virtual patient 
populations, generated by simulation using identified covariates and proper parameter 
ranges, could be used to assess inter-patient variability in such QSP models applied to 
clinical studies85.
Summary
Pharmacodynamic DDIs are common in drug combination therapies, and mechanistic 
understanding of PD DDIs can be useful for the rational design of treatment regimens. There 
is a broad spectrum of approaches, as well as a lack of quantitative standards, for the 
evaluation of PD-based DDIs. Empirical methods are suitable for high-throughput screening 
of drug combinations, and useful for generating testable hypotheses as to combinations that 
may produce desired outcomes. Mechanism-based PK/PD modeling and simulation are 
useful for comparing hypothesized combination regimens, and have multi-scale, 
translational potential. QSP models that characterize complex pathophysiological systems in 
considerable detail have applications along the entire spectrum of drug development 
activities, from the prediction of possible beneficial combinations in silico , to the rational 
design and evaluation of preclinical animal experiments and clinical studies. Despite the 
infrequent evaluation of PD DDIs in clinical settings, advances in experimental and 
computational techniques provide precedents and opportunities for PD DDI modeling and 
simulation to guide the development and analysis of clinical trials, and result in improved 
patient response to drug therapies.
Acknowledgements
This work includes descriptions of research that was funded in part by NIH Grant CA198096. We regret that space 
limitations preclude the inclusion of many highly meritorious applications and examples.
FundingNiu et al. Page 17
Clin Pharmacol Ther . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 June 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author ManuscriptThis work includes descriptions of research that was funded, in part, by NIH Grant # CA198096.
References
1. Butkiewicz M, Restrepo NA, Haines JL & Crawford DC Drug-Drug Interaction Profiles of 
Medication Regimens Extracted from a De-Identified Electronic Medical Records System. AMIA Jt 
Summits Transl Sci Proc 2016, 33–40 (2016). [PubMed: 27570646] 
2. Keyomarsi K & Moran RG Folinic acid augmentation of the effects of fluoropyrimidines on murine 
and human leukemic cells. Cancer Res 46, 5229–5235 (1986). [PubMed: 2944577] 
3. Mignat C & Unger T ACE inhibitors. Drug interactions of clinical significance. Drug Saf 12, 334–
347, doi:10.2165/00002018-199512050-00005 (1995). [PubMed: 7669262] 
4. Huang SM, Temple R, Throckmorton DC & Lesko LJ Drug interaction studies: study design, data 
analysis, and implications for dosing and labeling. Clin Pharmacol Ther 81, 298–304, doi:10.1038/
sj.clpt.6100054 (2007). [PubMed: 17259955] 
5. Barbaro G, Scozzafava A, Mastrolorenzo A & Supuran CT Highly active antiretroviral therapy: 
current state of the art, new agents and their pharmacological interactions useful for improving 
therapeutic outcome. Curr Pharm Des 11, 1805–1843 (2005). [PubMed: 15892677] 
6. Jilek BL et al. A quantitative basis for antiretroviral therapy for HIV-1 infection. Nat Med 18, 446–
451, doi:10.1038/nm.2649 (2012). [PubMed: 22344296] 
7. Castiglione F, Pappalardo F, Bernaschi M & Motta S Optimization of HAART with genetic 
algorithms and agent-based models of HIV infection. Bioinformatics 23, 3350–3355, doi:10.1093/
bioinformatics/btm408 (2007). [PubMed: 17942443] 
8. McLeod HL Clinically relevant drug-drug interactions in oncology. Br J Clin Pharmacol 45, 539–
544 (1998). [PubMed: 9663808] 
9. Ma J et al. Docetaxel and paclitaxel inhibit DNA-adduct formation and intracellular accumulation of 
cisplatin in human leukocytes. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol 37, 382–384, doi:10.1007/
s002800050401 (1996). [PubMed: 8548886] 
10. Kearns CM & Egorin MJ Considerations regarding the less-than-expected thrombocytopenia 
encountered with combination paclitaxel/carboplatin chemotherapy. Semin Oncol 24, S2-91–
S92-96 (1997).
11. Ando M et al. Sequence effect of docetaxel and carboplatin on toxicity, tumor response and 
pharmacokinetics in non-small-cell lung cancer patients: a phase I study of two sequences. Cancer 
Chemother Pharmacol 55, 552–558, doi:10.1007/s00280-004-0921-z (2005). [PubMed: 15856233] 
12. Jiang S et al. Paclitaxel Enhances Carboplatin-DNA Adduct Formation and Cytotoxicity. Chem 
Res Toxicol 28, 2250–2252, doi:10.1021/acs.chemrestox.5b00422 (2015). [PubMed: 26544157] 
13. Cadavid AP Aspirin: The Mechanism of Action Revisited in the Context of Pregnancy 
Complications. Front Immunol 8, 261, doi:10.3389/fimmu.2017.00261 (2017). [PubMed: 
28360907] 
14. Pelkonen O et al. Omics and its potential impact on R&D and regulation of complex herbal 
products. J Ethnopharmacol 140, 587–593, doi:10.1016/j.jep.2012.01.035 (2012). [PubMed: 
22313626] 
15. Zhu X, Shen X, Qu J, Straubinger RM & Jusko WJ Multi-Scale Network Model Supported by 
Proteomics for Analysis of Combined Gemcitabine and Birinapant Effects in Pancreatic Cancer 
Cells. CPT Pharmacometrics Syst Pharmacol 7, 549–561, doi:10.1002/psp4.12320 (2018). 
[PubMed: 30084546] 
16. Wang X et al. Temporal Effects of Combined Birinapant and Paclitaxel on Pancreatic Cancer Cells 
Investigated via Large-Scale, Ion-Current-Based Quantitative Proteomics (IonStar). Mol Cell 
Proteomics 17, 655–671, doi:10.1074/mcp.RA117.000519 (2018). [PubMed: 29358341] 
17. Quail DF & Joyce JA Microenvironmental regulation of tumor progression and metastasis. Nat 
Med 19, 1423–1437, doi:10.1038/nm.3394 (2013). [PubMed: 24202395] 
18. Binnewies M et al. Understanding the tumor immune microenvironment (TIME) for effective 
therapy. Nat Med 24, 541–550, doi:10.1038/s41591-018-0014-x (2018). [PubMed: 29686425] Niu et al. Page 18
Clin Pharmacol Ther . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 June 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript19. Lee MJ et al. Sequential application of anticancer drugs enhances cell death by rewiring apoptotic 
signaling networks. Cell 149, 780–794, doi:10.1016/j.cell.2012.03.031 (2012). [PubMed: 
22579283] 
20. Ma J & Waxman DJ Combination of antiangiogenesis with chemotherapy for more effective cancer 
treatment. Mol Cancer Ther 7, 3670–3684, doi:10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-08-0715 (2008). 
[PubMed: 19074844] 
21. Antonia SJ, Larkin J & Ascierto PA Immuno-oncology combinations: a review of clinical 
experience and future prospects. Clin Cancer Res 20, 6258–6268, doi:
10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-14-1457 (2014). [PubMed: 25341541] 
22. Proserpio V & Lonnberg T Single-cell technologies are revolutionizing the approach to rare cells. 
Immunol Cell Biol 94, 225–229, doi:10.1038/icb.2015.106 (2016). [PubMed: 26620630] 
23. Chou TC Drug Combination Studies and Their Synergy Quantification Using the Chou-Talalay 
Method. Cancer Res 70, 440–446, doi:10.1158/0008-5472.Can-09-1947 (2010). [PubMed: 
20068163] 
24. Amur S, LaVange L, Zineh I, Buckman-Garner S & Woodcock J Biomarker Qualification: Toward 
a Multiple Stakeholder Framework for Biomarker Development, Regulatory Acceptance, and 
Utilization. Clin Pharmacol Ther 98, 34–46, doi:10.1002/cpt.136 (2015). [PubMed: 25868461] 
25. Goossens N, Nakagawa S, Sun X & Hoshida Y Cancer biomarker discovery and validation. Transl 
Cancer Res 4, 256–269, doi:10.3978/j.issn.2218-676X.2015.06.04 (2015). [PubMed: 26213686] 
26. Townsley CA et al. Phase II study of erlotinib (OSI-774) in patients with metastatic colorectal 
cancer. Br J Cancer 94, 1136–1143, doi:10.1038/sj.bjc.6603055 (2006). [PubMed: 16570047] 
27. Holbeck SL et al. The National Cancer Institute ALMANAC: A Comprehensive Screening 
Resource for the Detection of Anticancer Drug Pairs with Enhanced Therapeutic Activity. Cancer 
Res 77, 3564–3576, doi:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-17-0489 (2017). [PubMed: 28446463] 
28. Loewe SM, H. Effect of combinations: Mathematical basis of problem. Arch. Exp. Pathol. 
Pharmacol 114, 313–326 (1926).
29. Bliss CI The Toxicity of Poisons Applied Jointly 1. Ann Appl Biol 26, 585–615, doi:doi:10.1111/j.
1744-7348.1939.tb06990.x (1939).
30. Ariëns EJ & Simonis AM A molecular basis for drug action. J Pharm Pharmacol 16, 137–157, 
doi:doi:10.1111/j.2042-7158.1964.tb07437.x (1964). [PubMed: 14163978] 
31. Zhao L, Au JL & Wientjes MG Method to Assess Interactivity of Drugs with Nonparallel 
Concentration Effect Relationships. Curr Cancer Drug Targets 17, 735–755, doi:
10.2174/1568009617666170330154054 (2017). [PubMed: 28359247] 
32. Ariëns EJ & Simonis AM A molecular basis for drug action: The interaction of one or more drugs 
with different receptors. J Pharm Pharmacol 16, 289–312, doi:doi:10.1111/j.
2042-7158.1964.tb07461.x (1964). [PubMed: 14198426] 
33. Greco WR, Bravo G & Parsons JC The search for synergy: a critical review from a response 
surface perspective. Pharmacol Rev 47, 331–385 (1995). [PubMed: 7568331] 
34. Chakraborty A & Jusko WJ Pharmacodynamic interaction of recombinant human interleukin-10 
and prednisolone using in vitro whole blood lymphocyte proliferation. J Pharm Sci 91, 1334–1342, 
doi:10.1002/jps.3000 (2002). [PubMed: 11977109] 
35. Earp J, Krzyzanski W, Chakraborty A, Zamacona MK & Jusko WJ Assessment of drug 
interactions relevant to pharmacodynamic indirect response models. J Pharmacokinet 
Pharmacodyn 31, 345–380 (2004). [PubMed: 15669772] 
36. Koch G, Schropp J & Jusko WJ Assessment of non-linear combination effect terms for drug-drug 
interactions. J Pharmacokinet Pharmacodyn 43, 461–479, doi:10.1007/s10928-016-9490-0 (2016). 
[PubMed: 27638639] 
37. Zhu X, Straubinger RM & Jusko WJ Mechanism-based mathematical modeling of combined 
gemcitabine and birinapant in pancreatic cancer cells. J Pharmacokinet Pharmacodyn 42, 477–496, 
doi:10.1007/s10928-015-9429-x (2015). [PubMed: 26252969] 
38. Nanavati C & Mager DE Sequential Exposure of Bortezomib and V orinostat is Synergistic in 
Multiple Myeloma Cells. Pharm Res 34, 668–679, doi:10.1007/s11095-017-2095-5 (2017). 
[PubMed: 28101809] Niu et al. Page 19
Clin Pharmacol Ther . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 June 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript39. Zimmer A, Katzir I, Dekel E, Mayo AE & Alon U Prediction of multidimensional drug dose 
responses based on measurements of drug pairs. Proc Nat Acad Sci 113, 10442–10447, doi:
10.1073/pnas.1606301113 (2016). [PubMed: 27562164] 
40. Molins EAG & Jusko WJ Assessment of three-drug combination pharmacodynamic interactions in 
pancreatic cancer cells. AAPS J. 20, 80, doi:10.1208/s12248-018-0235-4 (2018). [PubMed: 
29951754] 
41. Palmer AC & Sorger PK Combination Cancer Therapy Can Confer Benefit via Patient-to-Patient 
Variability without Drug Additivity or Synergy. Cell 171, 1678–1691 e1613, doi:10.1016/j.cell.
2017.11.009 (2017). [PubMed: 29245013] 
42. Lehar J et al. Chemical combination effects predict connectivity in biological systems. Mol Syst 
Biol 3, 80, doi:10.1038/msb4100116 (2007). [PubMed: 17332758] 
43. Berenbaum MC What is synergy? Pharmacol Rev 41, 93 (1989). [PubMed: 2692037] 
44. Catella-Lawson F et al. Cyclooxygenase inhibitors and the antiplatelet effects of aspirin. N Engl J 
Med 345, 1809–1817, doi:10.1056/NEJMoa003199 (2001). [PubMed: 11752357] 
45. Hong Y , Gengo FM, Rainka MM, Bates VE & Mager DE Population pharmacodynamic modelling 
of aspirin- and Ibuprofen-induced inhibition of platelet aggregation in healthy subjects. Clin 
Pharmacokinet 47, 129–137, doi:10.2165/00003088-200847020-00006 (2008). [PubMed: 
18193919] 
46. Bulitta JB et al. Two mechanisms of killing of Pseudomonas aeruginosa by tobramycin assessed at 
multiple inocula via mechanism-based modeling. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 59, 2315–2327, 
doi:10.1128/AAC.04099-14 (2015). [PubMed: 25645838] 
47. Yadav R, Landersdorfer CB, Nation RL, Boyce JD & Bulitta JB Novel approach to optimize 
synergistic carbapenem-aminoglycoside combinations against carbapenem-resistant Acinetobacter 
baumannii. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 59, 2286–2298, doi:10.1128/AAC.04379-14 (2015). 
[PubMed: 25645842] 
48. Yadav R, Bulitta JB, Nation RL & Landersdorfer CB Optimization of Synergistic Combination 
Regimens against Carbapenem- and Aminoglycoside-Resistant Clinical Pseudomonas aeruginosa 
Isolates via Mechanism-Based Pharmacokinetic/Pharmacodynamic Modeling. Antimicrob Agents 
Chemother 61, doi:10.1128/AAC.01011-16 (2017).
49. Landersdorfer CB et al. Optimization of a Meropenem-Tobramycin Combination Dosage Regimen 
against Hypermutable and Nonhypermutable Pseudomonas aeruginosa via Mechanism-Based 
Modeling and the Hollow-Fiber Infection Model. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 62, doi:10.1128/
AAC.02055-17 (2018).
50. Yadav R et al. Aminoglycoside Concentrations Required for Synergy with Carbapenems against 
Pseudomonas aeruginosa Determined via Mechanistic Studies and Modeling. Antimicrob Agents 
Chemother 61, doi:10.1128/AAC.00722-17 (2017).
51. Landersdorfer CB et al. Combating Carbapenem-Resistant Acinetobacter baumannii by an 
Optimized Imipenem-plus-Tobramycin Dosage Regimen: Prospective Validation via Hollow-Fiber 
Infection and Mathematical Modeling. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 62, doi:10.1128/AAC.
02053-17 (2018).
52. Yadav R, Bulitta JB, Wang J, Nation RL & Landersdorfer CB Evaluation of Pharmacokinetic/
Pharmacodynamic Model-Based Optimized Combination Regimens against Multidrug-Resistant 
Pseudomonas aeruginosa in a Murine Thigh Infection Model by Using Humanized Dosing 
Schemes. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 61, doi:10.1128/AAC.01268-17 (2017).
53. Rees VE et al. Meropenem Combined with Ciprofloxacin Combats Hypermutable Pseudomonas 
aeruginosa from Respiratory Infections of Cystic Fibrosis Patients. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 
62, doi:10.1128/AAC.01150-18 (2018).
54. Yadav R et al. Optimization and Evaluation of Piperacillin-Tobramycin Combination Dosage 
Regimens against Pseudomonas aeruginosa for Patients with Altered Pharmacokinetics via the 
Hollow-Fiber Infection Model and Mechanism-Based Modeling. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 
62, doi:10.1128/AAC.00078-18 (2018).
55. Silber HE, Jauslin PM, Frey N & Karlsson MO An integrated model for the glucose-insulin 
system. Basic Clin Pharmacol Toxicol 106, 189–194, doi:10.1111/j.1742-7843.2009.00510.x 
(2010). [PubMed: 20050839] Niu et al. Page 20
Clin Pharmacol Ther . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 June 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript56. Choy S, Henin E, van der Walt JS, Kjellsson MC & Karlsson MO Identification of the primary 
mechanism of action of an insulin secretagogue from meal test data in healthy volunteers based on 
an integrated glucose-insulin model. J Pharmacokinet Pharmacodyn 40, 1–10, doi:10.1007/
s10928-012-9281-1 (2013). [PubMed: 23179858] 
57. Schneck KB, Zhang X, Bauer R, Karlsson MO & Sinha VP Assessment of glycemic response to an 
oral glucokinase activator in a proof of concept study: application of a semi-mechanistic, 
integrated glucose-insulin-glucagon model. J Pharmacokinet Pharmacodyn 40, 67–80, doi:
10.1007/s10928-012-9287-8 (2013). [PubMed: 23263773] 
58. de Winter W et al. A mechanism-based disease progression model for comparison of long-term 
effects of pioglitazone, metformin and gliclazide on disease processes underlying type 2 diabetes 
mellitus. J Pharmacokinet Pharmacodyn 33, 313–343, doi:10.1007/s10928-006-9008-2 (2006). 
[PubMed: 16552630] 
59. Choy S, Kjellsson MC, Karlsson MO & de Winter W Weight-HbA1c-insulin-glucose model for 
describing disease progression of type 2 diabetes. CPT Pharmacometrics Syst Pharmacol 5, 11–19, 
doi:10.1002/psp4.12051 (2016). [PubMed: 26844011] 
60. Hahnfeldt P, Panigrahy D, Folkman J & Hlatky L Tumor development under angiogenic signaling: 
a dynamical theory of tumor growth, treatment response, and postvascular dormancy. Cancer Res 
59, 4770–4775 (1999). [PubMed: 10519381] 
61. Hutchinson LG et al. Modeling Longitudinal Preclinical Tumor Size Data to Identify Transient 
Dynamics in Tumor Response to Antiangiogenic Drugs. CPT Pharmacometrics Syst Pharmacol 5, 
636–645, doi:10.1002/psp4.12142 (2016). [PubMed: 27863175] 
62. Imbs DC et al. Revisiting Bevacizumab + Cytotoxics Scheduling Using Mathematical Modeling: 
Proof of Concept Study in Experimental Non-Small Cell Lung Carcinoma. CPT Pharmacometrics 
Syst Pharmacol 7, 42–50, doi:10.1002/psp4.12265 (2018). [PubMed: 29218795] 
63. Meads MB, Gatenby RA & Dalton WS Environment-mediated drug resistance: a major contributor 
to minimal residual disease. Nat Rev Cancer 9, 665–674, doi:10.1038/nrc2714 (2009). [PubMed: 
19693095] 
64. Picco N, Sahai E, Maini PK & Anderson ARA Integrating Models to Quantify Environment-
Mediated Drug Resistance. Cancer Res 77, 5409–5418, doi:10.1158/0008-5472.Can-17-0835 
(2017). [PubMed: 28754669] 
65. Houot R, Schultz LM, Marabelle A & Kohrt H T-cell-based Immunotherapy: Adoptive Cell 
Transfer and Checkpoint Inhibition. Cancer Immunol Res 3, 1115–1122, doi:
10.1158/2326-6066.CIR-15-0190 (2015). [PubMed: 26438444] 
66. Kirschner D & Panetta JC Modeling immunotherapy of the tumor-immune interaction. J Math Biol 
37, 235–252 (1998). [PubMed: 9785481] 
67. de Pillis LG, Gu W & Radunskaya AE Mixed immunotherapy and chemotherapy of tumors: 
modeling, applications and biological interpretations. J Theor Biol 238, 841–862, doi:10.1016/
j.jtbi.2005.06.037 (2006). [PubMed: 16153659] 
68. Serre R et al. Mathematical Modeling of Cancer Immunotherapy and Its Synergy with 
Radiotherapy. Cancer Res 76, 4931–4940, doi:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-15-3567 (2016). 
[PubMed: 27302167] 
69. Wilson S & Levy D A mathematical model of the enhancement of tumor vaccine efficacy by 
immunotherapy. Bull Math Biol 74, 1485–1500, doi:10.1007/s11538-012-9722-4 (2012). 
[PubMed: 22438084] 
70. Konstorum A, Vella AT, Adler AJ & Laubenbacher RC Addressing current challenges in cancer 
immunotherapy with mathematical and computational modelling. J R Soc Interface 14, doi:
10.1098/rsif.2017.0150 (2017).
71. Kosinsky Y et al. Radiation and PD-(L)1 treatment combinations: immune response and dose 
optimization via a predictive systems model. J Immunother Cancer 6, 17, doi:10.1186/
s40425-018-0327-9 (2018). [PubMed: 29486799] 
72. Peterson MC & Riggs MM FDA Advisory Meeting Clinical Pharmacology Review Utilizes a 
Quantitative Systems Pharmacology (QSP) Model: A Watershed Moment? CPT Pharmacometrics 
Syst Pharmacol 4, e00020, doi:10.1002/psp4.20 (2015). [PubMed: 26225239] Niu et al. Page 21
Clin Pharmacol Ther . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 June 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript73. Knight-Schrijver VR, Chelliah V , Cucurull-Sanchez L & Le Novere N The promises of quantitative 
systems pharmacology modelling for drug development. Comput Struct Biotechnol J 14, 363–370, 
doi:10.1016/j.csbj.2016.09.002 (2016). [PubMed: 27761201] 
74. Mager DE & Kimko HHC Systems Pharmacology and Pharmacodynamics: An Introduction. 
AAPS Adv Pharm Sci 23, 3–14, doi:10.1007/978-3-319-44534-2_1 (2016).
75. Hart T & Xie L Providing data science support for systems pharmacology and its implications to 
drug discovery. Expert Opin Drug Discov 11, 241–256, doi:10.1517/17460441.2016.1135126 
(2016). [PubMed: 26689499] 
76. Chudasama VL, Ovacik MA, Abernethy DR & Mager DE Logic-Based and Cellular 
Pharmacodynamic Modeling of Bortezomib Responses in U266 Human Myeloma Cells. J 
Pharmacol Exp Ther 354, 448–458, doi:10.1124/jpet.115.224766 (2015). [PubMed: 26163548] 
77. Bloomingdale P, Nguyen V A, Niu J & Mager DE Boolean network modeling in systems 
pharmacology. J Pharmacokinet Pharmacodyn 45, 159–180, doi:10.1007/s10928-017-9567-4 
(2018). [PubMed: 29307099] 
78. Zhu X, Shen X, Qu J, Straubinger RM & Jusko WJ Proteomic Analysis of Combined Gemcitabine 
and Birinapant in Pancreatic Cancer Cells. Front Pharmacol 9, 84, doi:10.3389/fphar.2018.00084 
(2018). [PubMed: 29520231] 
79. Kirouac DC How Do We “Validate” a QSP Model? CPT Pharmacometrics Syst Pharmacol 7, 547–
548, doi:10.1002/psp4.12310 (2018). [PubMed: 29761661] 
80. Timmis J et al. Building confidence in quantitative systems pharmacology models: An engineer’s 
guide to exploring the rationale in model design and development. CPT Pharmacometrics Syst 
Pharmacol 6, 156–167, doi:10.1002/psp4.12157 (2017). [PubMed: 27863172] 
81. Friedrich CM A model qualification method for mechanistic physiological QSP models to support 
model-informed drug development. CPT Pharmacometrics Syst Pharmacol 5, 43–53, doi:10.1002/
psp4.12056 (2016). [PubMed: 26933515] 
82. Ryu JY , Kim HU & Lee SY Deep learning improves prediction of drug-drug and drug-food 
interactions. Proc Natl Acad Sci 115, E4304–E4311, doi:10.1073/pnas.1803294115 (2018). 
[PubMed: 29666228] 
83. van Hassselt JGC & Iyengar R Systems pharmacology-based identification of pharmacogenomic 
determinants of adverse drug reactions using human iPSC-derived cell lines. Curr Opin Syst Biol 
4, 9–15, doi:10.1016/j.coisb.2017.05.006 (2017).
84. Mager DE & Jusko WJ Development of translational pharmacokinetic-pharmacodynamic models. 
Clin Pharmacol Ther 83, 909–912, doi:clpt200852 [pii] 10.1038/clpt.2008.52 (2008). [PubMed: 
18388873] 
85. Rieger TR et al. Improving the generation and selection of virtual populations in quantitative 
systems pharmacology models. Prog Biophys Mol Biol, doi:10.1016/j.pbiomolbio.2018.06.002 
(2018).Niu et al. Page 22
Clin Pharmacol Ther . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 June 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author ManuscriptFigure 1. 
Array of mathematical modeling approaches for analyzing PD DDIs in diverse biological 
experimental systems. Empirical models frequently are applied to in vitro  screening studies 
to assess the nature of potential PD DDIs. These models are used less frequently for pre-
clinical animal studies and clinical studies, in which mechanism-based PK/PD models 
should be used to best characterize responses to drug combinations and to avoid the need for 
exhaustive PD DDI testing that is required for empirical assessments. Quantitative systems 
pharmacology (QSP) models can be constructed and calibrated across all biological systems 
to investigate the mechanism(s) of PD DDIs in a manner complimentary with empirical and 
mechanism-based models. Integration across biological systems is possible using hybrid 
systems models to understand and predict PD DDIs in humans. PBPK/PD: physiologically-
based PK and/or PD; ODE: ordinary differential equations; PDE: partial differential 
equations.Niu et al. Page 23
Clin Pharmacol Ther . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 June 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author ManuscriptFigure 2. 
Examples of isobolograms for assessing PD drug interactions. The x- and y-axis are IC 50-
normalized concentrations for a drug pair. Red indicates antagonism, blue indicates synergy, 
and black lines represent Loewe additivity (A), Bliss independence when γ1 = γ2 = 1 (Eq. 
11, B), and Bliss independence when γ1 = 0.5 and γ2 = 1 (Eq. 11, C).Niu et al. Page 24
Clin Pharmacol Ther . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 June 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author ManuscriptFigure 3. 
A hypothetical Bliss-independence response surface is shown for the effects of combined 
paclitaxel and birinapant upon the viability of PANC-1 pancreatic cancer cells. The x- and y-
axes represent the concentrations of the two drugs, and the z-axis represents the magnitude 
of cell progression, normalized to untreated control cells, after 72h exposure to both drugs 
concurrently. Red dots are experimental observations above the reference additive surface 
(antagonism); blue dots are observations below the surface (synergism). Blue dots 
predominate over the red, suggesting an overall synergistic interaction that was confirmed 
quantitatively by model analysis. This figure is reproduced with permission of the American 
Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, from Wang et al., 201816; permission 
conveyed through the Copyright Clearance Center, Inc.Niu et al. Page 25
Clin Pharmacol Ther . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 June 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author ManuscriptFigure 4. 
Mechanism-based pharmacodynamic model of COX-1 inhibition. Aspirin (asa) induced an 
irreversible, 2nd-order and concentration-dependent loss of free COX-1 enzyme. Ibuprofen 
(ibu) inhibited the COX-1 by the formation of a reversible binding complex. C represents the 
drug concentration. This figure is reprinted by permission from Springer Nature; from Hong 
et al., 200845; permission conveyed through Springer Nature RightsLink Permissions.Niu et al. Page 26
Clin Pharmacol Ther . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 June 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author ManuscriptFigure 5. 
Multi-scale network model integrating systems information and gemcitabine- and 
birinapant-mediated effects on signaling pathways, cell cycle distributions (G0/G1-, S-, and 
G2/M-phases), and apoptosis in pancreatic cancer cells. Blue open circles represent 
proliferating and apoptotic cells. Grey circles represent cell cycle stages, and arrow-head 
lines indicate activation or transitions. Bar-head lines indicates inhibition. Squares represent 
the specific intracellular proteins as indicted. Box color denotes the source of the data for the 
figure (red: western blot analysis; yellow: published literature; clear: LC/MS proteomics; 
grey: quantitative data not available). Dashed lines represent hypothesized interactions. This 
figure is reprinted with the permission from John Wiley and Sons; from Zhu et al., 201878.Niu et al. Page 27
Clin Pharmacol Ther . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 June 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript