Text Mining for Drug–Drug Interaction
Heng-Yi Wu1, Chien-Wei Chiang1, and Lang Li1,*
1Center for Computational Biology and Bioinformatics, School of Medicine, Indiana University
Abstract
In order to understand the mechanisms of drug–drug interaction (DDI), the study of 
pharmacokinetics (PK), pharmacodynamics (PD), and pharmacogenetics (PG) data are significant. 
In recent years, drug PK parameters, drug interaction parameters, and PG data have been unevenly 
collected in different databases and published extensively in literature. Also the lack of an 
appropriate PK ontology and a well-annotated PK corpus, which provide the background 
knowledge and the criteria of determining DDI, respectively, lead to the difficulty of developing 
DDI text mining tools for PK data collection from the literature and data integration from multiple 
databases.
To conquer the issues, we constructed a comprehensive pharmacokinetics ontology. It includes all 
aspects of in vitro pharmacokinetics experiments, in vivo pharmacokinetics studies, as well as 
drug metabolism and transportation enzymes. Using our pharmacokinetics ontology, a PK corpus 
was constructed to present four classes of pharmacokinetics abstracts: in vivo pharmacokinetics 
studies, in vivo pharmacogenetic studies, in vivo drug interaction studies, and in vitro drug 
interaction studies. A novel hierarchical three-level annotation scheme was proposed and 
implemented to tag key terms, drug interaction sentences, and drug interaction pairs. The utility of 
the pharmacokinetics ontology was demonstrated by annotating three pharmacokinetics studies; 
and the utility of the PK corpus was demonstrated by a drug interaction extraction text mining 
analysis.
The pharmacokinetics ontology annotates both in vitro pharmacokinetics experiments and in vivo 
pharmacokinetics studies. The PK corpus is a highly valuable resource for the text mining of 
pharmacokinetics parameters and drug interactions.
Keywords
Pharmacokinetics; Pharmacodynamics; Drug; drug interaction; Text mining; Corpus; Ontology; 
Relation extraction; Enzyme; Transporter
1 Introduction
Adverse drug reaction (ADR) is one of the major causes of morbidity and mortality 
occurring in clinical care every year. To investigate the crucial problem, the US Food and 
Drug Administration (FDA) found that more than 40 % of the US population is prescribed 
Corresponding Author: Lang Li, Address: 410 W. 10th Street, Suite 5000, Indianapolis, IN 46202 USA, Phone: 317-274-4332 
(office), lali@iupui.edu. 
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Methods Mol Biol . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 November 07.
Published in final edited form as:
Methods Mol Biol . 2014 ; 1159: 47–75. doi:10.1007/978-1-4939-0709-0_4.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscriptmore than four medications at a single time, which makes them more susceptible to ADR 
[1]. A literature search in Medline and Embase database from 1990 to 2006 showed that 
drug–drug interactions (DDIs) were held responsible for 0.054 % of the emergency 
department (ED) visits, 0.57 % of the hospital admissions, and 0.12 % of the re-
hospitalizations [ 2]. It is possible that drug interaction can be beneficial or detrimental. The 
use of multiple drugs might provide synergism such as increasing the efficacy of therapeutic 
effect, decreasing dosage but holding the same efficacy to avoid toxicity, or minimizing the 
drug resistance [ 3]. However, we have more interests in the investigation of negative 
interaction because pathological significance is often unexpected and hard to be diagnosed. 
To predispose DDI, the importance of high-risk factors like age, polypharmacy, and genetic 
polymorphisms should be carefully evaluated [ 4]. In the elder population, DDIs account for 
4.8 % of the hospital admissions, which is much higher than the proportion of DDI victims 
within the total population. The reason is directed to the abatement of liver metabolism or 
kidney function [ 5, 6]. Genetic polymorphism has profound influence on enzyme function, 
which might result in increased drug metabolism and absence of drug response. Evidences 
[7] suggested that patients affected by genetic polymorphisms will experience severe 
toxicities upon drug intake.
For economic aspect, the problem of DDI effect or co-medication effect has scaled such 
heights that it has even led to withdrawing of drugs from the market after approval. The 
1990s saw the withdrawal of more than 11 drugs as shown in ref. 8 . In 2007, the 
biopharmaceutical industry invested roundabout $58.8 billion for the research and 
development as the withdrawing of drugs [ 9] is a major setback to the industry as the 
deployment of a single drug compound is estimated at $200 million.
1.1 Drug–Drug Interaction Mechanisms and In Vitro and In Vivo Drug Interaction Studies
DDI can result when a substance affects the activity of a drug or its metabolites when these 
two drugs are administrated at the same time. The simultaneous administration of two drugs, 
which causes synergistic or antagonistic effect, might lead to the alternation of medication 
effectiveness or some harming effects on patient body. Those potential influences on human 
body should be noticed to prevent from a high risk of multiple interactions because the 
number of approved drugs increases. To preclude the possibility of hazardous interaction, 
understanding the significant scientific principles or mechanisms of DDI is important.
Due to the continued growth in drug development and the insight into molecular biology, we 
come to realize that transporter and enzyme played an important role in drug elimination, 
which inspired a clue to dig the mechanisms surrounding DDI. In brief, there are two major 
molecular mechanisms of DDI, enzyme-based drug metabolism and transporter-based drug 
transportation [ 10]. If an enzyme that is responsible for the metabolism of one drug is 
induced or inhibited by another drug, then the clearance of original drug will be changed, 
which might result in being toxic or less effective. For transporter- based drug 
transportation, transporter is important to drug deposition. Drugs can be metabolized only 
after they are transported into liver cells. To understand how a transporter-mediated DDI 
happens, the knowledge of the transporter substrates and inhibitors can suggest potential 
DDIs [ 11].Wu et al. Page 2
Methods Mol Biol . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 November 07.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author ManuscriptThere are two basic types of drug interaction, pharmacokinetics (PK) and 
pharmacodynamics (PD). In short, PK investigates the activity of drug combinations with 
drug absorption, disposition, metabolism, excretion, and transportation (ADMET), which 
describes how these five criteria influence drug level (concentration). Pharmacokinetically 
speaking, potentiative or reductive combinations are, respectively, correlated to positive or 
negative modulation of drug transport, permeation, distribution, localization, or metabolism. 
Potentiative modulation of drug transport will enhance drug absorption via the disruption of 
transport carrier, increase drug concentration in plasma by inhibiting metabolic process, and 
stimulate or inhibit the metabolism of drugs into active or inactive form. On the other hand, 
reductive modulation provides contrasting perspectives to potentiative modulation. The 
reductive modulation of drug transport typically blocks drug absorption, decreases drug 
concentration in plasma, and reduces drug metabolism activity [ 12]. Those information 
brings to systematically investigate the physiological and biochemical mechanisms of drug 
exposure in multiple tissue types, cells, animals, and human subjects [ 13], which links 
preclinical and clinical phase of drug development. If the PK can be interpreted as the dose– 
concentration relationship, pharmacodynamics (PD) can be defined as the mechanism of 
drug action and relationship between drug concentration and effect. A drug's 
pharmacodynamics effect ranges widely from the molecular signals (such as its targets or 
downstream biomarkers) to clinical symptoms (such as the efficacy or side effect endpoints). 
Classification of its therapeutic effects: It can be synergistic, additive, or antagonistic if the 
effect is greater than, equal to, or less than the summed effects of drug combinations [ 12].
As stated in the previous section, the complicated transporter– enzyme interplay in the 
deposition of drug leads to the difficulty for the identification of DDIs in drug 
administration and drug development. Thus, understanding the molecular mechanism 
underlying different types of drug interaction could facilitate the discovery of novel DDI. 
Recently, in vitro technologies can qualitatively provide an insight into the potential DDI 
based on the observation of enzyme kinetic parameters. Via ADME screening efforts as well 
as the assessment of CYP inhibition, the choice of test compound inhibiting the metabolism 
of one probe substrate for an enzyme in the in vitro experiment can be fulfilled to carry out 
the prediction of in vivo DDI. Wienkers and Heath [ 14] addressed the basic principles of in 
vitro inhibition prediction underlying the generation of in vitro drug metabolism data and 
suggested several factors that introduced error or uncertainty into a quantitative prediction of 
in vivo DDI based on in vitro-derived PK parameters. In ref. 15 , three factors authors 
recommended for the ideal model to predict metabolic drug–drug interaction (M-DDI) 
should be an accurate measurement of the average increase in the area under the plasma 
concentration–time curve (AUC) of a victim drug following administration of a perpetrator 
drug, the plasma binding displacement interaction, and the impact of the concentration–time 
profile of the inhibitor. To evaluate the potential for M-DDI [ 15] developed an in silico 
software SIMCYP, which incorporates extensive data on demographics; disease states; 
anatomical, physiological, genetic, and biochemical variables; and input of information on 
in vitro drug metabolism and transport.Wu et al. Page 3
Methods Mol Biol . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 November 07.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript1.2 Computational Drug Interaction Prediction and Drug Interaction Text Mining
1.2.1 Overview of Computational Drug Interaction Prediction— The evaluation of 
the potential risk of DDI is of importance in patient safety since DDIs can raise the danger 
of patients and the cost of healthcare system. According to the guidance for industry from 
the Food and Drug Administration [ 16], study design, data analysis, and implication for 
dosing and labeling are suggested to deal with drug interaction studies. When studying DDI 
for a new drug, it usually begins with in vitro study to determine whether a drug is a 
substrate, inhibitor, or inducer of metabolizing enzymes. The consequence of in vitro 
investigations can serve as an evidence to screen out the candidate potential drug pairs for 
additional in vivo study. To conduct an in vivo DDI study for an investigating drug, a 
quantitative analysis to mathematically describe the kinetics of drug metabolism involved in 
ADME process is needed. The basic model for the initial assessment of DDI based on in 
vitro and in vivo studies can be achieved by physiologically based pharmacokinetics 
(PBPK) modeling. From published in vitro experiments and in vivo studies [ 17 – 24] had 
developed Bayesian models and computational algorithms to construct PBPK models for 
DDI prediction.
Another common way to explore novel DDI is literature-based discovery. The hidden 
knowledge among information embedded in publications can be dug out through finding 
connections between articles. To this end, many researchers took advantage of some 
commercial or public databases as resource, such as Metabolism and Transport Drug 
Interaction Database (DIDB) [ 25], PharGKB [ 26], and DrugBank [ 27] which provided 
extensive lists of DDI information published in articles, clinical files, or biomedical research 
reports. Gottlieb et al. [ 28] proposed a computational framework INDI to infer and explore 
DDI by calculating similarity measurement between drug pair via diverse feature 
measurements, i.e., chemical based, ligand based, side effect based, annotation based, and 
sequence based. However, the problem of data inconsistency arose when using different 
databases. Some significant scientific evidences associated with DDI are limited or lacking 
in some existing databases. This deficiency is hard to prevent because the tasks of data 
collections are manually accomplished by different research groups or professional experts. 
To conquer this problem, employing the technologies from information retrieval (IR) or 
natural language processing (NLP) can be a solution to help extract data more efficiently 
and consistently.
1.2.2 Biomedical Text Mining— Text mining refers to the process of deriving high-
quality information from text, which relies on NLP. To translate the text into computer-
readable language, there are some basic steps of NLP [ 29], including sentence splitting, 
tokenization, part of speech, named entity recognition (NER), shallow parsing, and syntactic 
parsing. In this section, we do not go into the details of techniques for NLP tools. The 
attentions will be paid more on the tasks of corpus construction, IR, or information 
extraction (IE), which employs highly scalable statistics-based techniques to index and 
search large volume of text efficiently.
Extracting facts from texts is the goal of text-mining systems. The range of extraction tasks 
can be narrow from retrieving potentially relevant articles by sophisticated keyword search Wu et al. Page 4
Methods Mol Biol . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 November 07.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscriptor classifying papers into different ontological types (IR), recognizing biological entities or 
concepts in text, and detecting relations between biological entities (IE) and broader to 
document summarization or question answering (beyond IE) [ 30]. To fulfill those tasks in 
biomedical domain, NER is an initial processing step because the significant knowledge is 
usually centered on the mechanism of biological activities which are described by 
nominalized verbs and nouns within sentences. Therefore, identifying text that satisfies 
various types of information needs is an important first step toward accurate text mining. 
But how to utilize the identified entities for improving text mining is challenging. One 
solution to this problem is an annotated corpus. The corpus annotated with such information 
allows real usage within text to be taken into account. The annotated sentence then can be 
represented in syntactic and semantic format, which shows the different levels of scientific 
characteristics. However, the strategy of constructing corpus is diverse. It differs with the 
purpose of text mining task and the methodology we used in extracting information. Kim et 
al. [31] introduces GENIA corpus with linguistically rich annotations for biomedical 
articles. The value of GENIA corpus comes from its annotations. All biologically 
meaningful terms are semantically annotated with descriptors from GENIA ontology. 
Wilbur et al. [ 32] suggest the basic guideline and criteria of corpus construction and 
annotation task for facilitating the training components of IE system by using machine 
learning method. Another value of annotated corpus is being a gold standard that facilitates 
the evaluation of approach. The success of practical applications crucially depends on the 
quality of extraction results, which is against the access of gold standard reference.
1.2.3 Relationship Extraction— Within IE methods, we are more interested in 
relationship extraction. The goal of relationship extraction is to detect the prespecified type 
of relation between a pair of entities of given types. A relation is typically represented as a 
pair of entities, linked by an arc that is either directed or undirected. The arc is given a label 
usually corresponding to a semantic type. In biology, the type of entities can be very specific 
such as gene, protein, or drug, while the type of relationship can be referred from some 
particular verbs, including transcribe, repress, or inhibit.
To effectively extract relationship, analysis of sentence structure is necessary. The use of 
semantic processing or deep parsing techniques that analyze both the syntactic and semantic 
structure of texts can benefit relation extraction. Several approaches had been reported in 
literature to extract the relation of interest. Generally, there are three main approaches for 
relationship extraction: co-occurrence-based, rule-based, and machine learning based 
approaches. Muller et al. [ 33] employ co-occurrence-based method, which is the simplest 
way to capture relationships relying on co-occurrence of two entities to derive a relation. 
Rule-based approaches [ 34, 35] are to take advantage of linguistic technology to grasp 
syntactic structure or semantic meaning for understanding the relationship from the 
unstructured text. Feldman et al. [ 34] employed an NP1–verb–NP2 template to identify the 
relation between two domain-specific entities. Fundel et al. [ 35] constructed a set of domain-
specific rules and apply them to dependency parse tree to capture different forms of 
expressing a given relationship. Finally, classifiers using machine learning approaches such 
as support vector machines (SVM) [ 36] are often used for relation extraction. This method 
needs laborious efforts to define grammars or rules, and text in training dataset is manually Wu et al. Page 5
Methods Mol Biol . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 November 07.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscripttagged by a human expert. This text mining method uses the training data to automatically 
learn the “rules” so it can mine wanted information or identify the necessary knowledge 
[37–40].
The comparison among different methods is not easy because each method obtains its 
inherited pros and cons. Co-occurrence method provides the highest recall but poor 
precision among three. A large amount of false-positive relations are returned whenever the 
sentence is sophisticated with more than two entities or two key entities co-occurred in each 
single sentence but it does not state their relationship. Thus, co-occurrence method is more 
suitable to use as a simple baseline method for performance comparison. Rule-based method 
achieves better precision in extracting binary relationships due to the more precise rule 
conditions for defining relationship. But when it meets the complex sentence with various 
coordinates and relational clauses, the performance turns down obviously [ 41]. In general, 
machine learning-based method performs the best among methods. As an evidence in 
BioCreative challenge [ 42], the frameworks using supervised machine learning algorithm 
outperformed the existing methods in detecting protein–protein interaction (PPI). One 
important advantage is that system can predict categories for unseen samples. However, this 
advantage is heavily relying on annotated corpus [ 43]. Therefore, it can also be a big 
disadvantage because of the need for huge learning set.
1.2.4 Literature Review for Extracting Drug–Drug Interaction— Different 
approaches had been developed for extracting biomedical relationships such as PPI. From 
the experience of previous researches centered on PPI [ 36 – 40], few approaches have been 
proposed to the problem of detecting DDI. To promote the development of DDI extraction 
tools, DDIExtraction 2011, the first challenge task on DDI extraction, was held in 2011 at 
Spain. In this workshop, they provided evidence for the most effective methods available to 
solve specific problems and reveal the performance on these problems. In competition, most 
participants proposed systems using classifiers SVM or RLS. Their choices verified that 
machine learning can outperform other methods in relation extraction. Observed from 
results, approaches based on kernel methods achieved better performance than the classical 
feature-based methods [ 44]. Thus, the advantages of kernel-based method using machine 
learning classifier are spotlighted in this workshop.
In literature, some articles are outstanding in DDI extraction. The co-chairs of 
DDIExtraction 2011 [ 43] proposed a hybrid approach, which combines shallow parsing and 
pattern matching to extract relation between drugs based on annotated corpus. It utilizes the 
proposed syntactic patterns to split the sentence into clauses from which relations are 
extracted by matching patterns. The ability of dealing with complicated sentence is the 
advantage of this method. Complexity can be diminished by separating a long sentence into 
simplified clauses and by the detection of the apposition and coordinate structure. But there 
is one gap in the extraction of DDI information if used in pharmacokinetics or 
pharmacogenetics articles. Only exploring DDI based on literal denotation will lead to the 
missing detection of actual DDI information due to the lack of scientific knowledge. In ref. 
45, DDIs are identified by aggregating gene–drug interactions which are extracted via rule-
based method. The extracted interactions are then normalized and mapped into their 
standardized ontology to form the semantics network. The network could be useful to find Wu et al. Page 6
Methods Mol Biol . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 November 07.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscriptpotential DDIs. Differed from Percha et al. [ 45] who extracted DDI via the perspective of 
pharmacogenetics, Teri et al. [ 46] developed a method that combined text mining and 
automated reasoning to predict enzyme specific DDIs. In most situations, the extracted 
relations from the results of conventional relation extraction are not sufficient to derive DDI. 
By representing the general knowledge related to metabolism and interaction with the form 
of logic rules, DDI can be acquired in the reasoning phase.
2 Materials
For PK DDI text mining, the materials for the construction of PK ontology are prepared. A 
descriptor from specialized ontology can be used to describe the environment of PK 
experiments (in vivo and in vitro) and the nature of drug mechanisms (all drug metabolism 
and transportation enzymes.
For drug name, the dictionary is created using drug names from DrugBank 3.0 [ 27]. 
DrugBank consists of 6,829 drugs which can be grouped into different categories of FDA-
approved, FDA-approved biotech, nutraceuticals, and experimental drugs. The drug names 
are mapped to generic names, brand names, and synonyms. The environment condition-
specific in vitro PK experiment and their associated PK parameters are referred from [ 47 – 
50]. The materials for in vivo study are summarized from two textbooks [ 13, 51]. The 
information of tissue-specific transporters and enzymes with all their probe inhibitors, 
inducers, and substrates were collected from industry standard ( http://www.fda.gov/Drugs/
GuidanceComplianceRegulatoryInformation/Guidances/ucm064982.htm ), reviewed in the 
top pharmacology journal [ 16].
3 Methods
To extract PK DDI by text-mining system, there are three noteworthy issues we should 
carefully deal with. (1) Recognition of drug name is one of the most salient issues in DDI 
text mining. Without satisfied performance in tagging drug name, false-positive or missing 
detection eliminates the accuracy of DDI results. Unlike gene's or protein's name, the 
representations of drug name are more sophisticated. The same drug may show in different 
documents with a number of ways, especially for metabolites of a compound [ 52]. The 
diversity of naming conventions perplexes the identification of drug names in 
pharmacokinetics articles. (2) Ontology is the main repository of formally represented 
knowledge for DDI text-mining system. The hierarchical repository provides a framework 
for knowledge integration and sharing, which give machine-readable descriptors of 
biomedical concepts and their relations. The challenge for ontology construction is to 
develop appropriate ontology resources and link them to adequate terminological lexicons 
[53]. (3) Corpus construction is essential to make text mining successful. It is not possible 
for a machine to capture useful information from text data written in natural language 
directly. To bridge the gap between text data and machine, corpus creates the accessibility 
for computer to read text data precisely [ 31, 54]. Another important issue within corpus is 
the scheme of biological annotation. The task of annotation can be regarded as identifying 
and classifying entities or sentences according to predefined categories. A well-defined 
scheme for annotation task is indispensable to corpus construction.Wu et al. Page 7
Methods Mol Biol . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 November 07.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author ManuscriptAn ideal system for PK DDI extraction should provide not only a comprehensive list of 
DDIs in a cost-efficient manner but also the mechanism behind interactions. In current DDI 
extraction methods, most researches extract DDIs centering on exploring the semantics of 
sentence. Given a sentence with at least two drugs, they analyze sentence structure and 
identify drug entities and trigger words (e.g., verbs like inhibit or induce) to accomplish this 
task. However, in most situations, complete DDI information is presented in complicated 
ways with more than a single sentence. More concrete DDI conditions such as experimental 
measurements might be mentioned in those sentences which only have a single drug. For 
instance, the way to express DDI information in pharmacokinetics articles is quite different 
from that in pharmacodynamics articles. The sentence only with a single drug frequently 
mentions its corresponding PK parameters or other measurements, which show the practical 
conditions for drug metabolism. The merit of those parameters gives the clue to determine 
inhibition or induction of DDI as well as provides a criterion to exam the reliability of found 
DDIs.
To meet the abovementioned issues, this chapter tries to propose a system to detect DDI 
information not only from narrative sentences but also in those sentences with a single drug, 
which contains possible DDI candidate. Besides detecting DDI pairs from sentence 
structure, considering PK parameter as an evidence to determine DDI is important in our 
strategy. In the following sections, we carefully discuss how the task of drug name mapping 
works, the construction of an integrated pharmacokinetics ontology and corpus for text-
mining system, and finally how to apply them in the text-mining system.
3.1 Drug Name Mapping
To detect the name by using NER, the performance of DDI extraction matters if the 
accuracy of drug name identification is not satisfied [ 52].
Drug names were created using the drug names from DrugBank 3.0 [ 27]. DrugBank consists 
of 6,829 chemicals with unique DrugBank ID which can be grouped into different categories 
of FDA-approved, FDA-approved biotech, nutraceuticals, and experimental drugs. The 
chemicals are mapped to generic names, brand names, and synonyms which results in 
36,433 unique DrugBank ID–name pairs. 315 names in DrugBank have less than 4 letters 
such as chloramphenicol, DB0046 has a synonym CAP, and cholecalciferol, DB00169 has a 
synonym CC. The words with less than four letters may cause bad NER; therefore, they 
were removed.
In addition, drug metabolites were also tagged, because they are important in in vitro 
studies. The metabolites were judged by either prefix or suffix: oxi, hydroxyl, methyl, 
acetyl, N-dealkyl, N-demethyl, nor, dihydroxy, O-dealkyl, and sulfo. These prefixes and 
suffixes are due to the reactions due to phase I metabolism (oxidation, reduction, hydrolysis) 
and phase II metabolism (methylation, sulfation, acetylation, glucuronidation) [ 55].
3.2 PK Ontology Construction
The motivation for ontology in biomedical text mining is to make sense of raw text. 
According to the defined concepts, properties, relationships, instances, and axioms for a 
given domain, raw text can be interpreted by the descriptors of ontology with a standardized Wu et al. Page 8
Methods Mol Biol . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 November 07.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscriptformat and organized into hierarchical structure. Such advantages allow complex text to be 
represented with semantic and consistent manner [ 56].
The process of building ontology is a complex and tedious process. Various domain-specific 
resources and lexicons are required to satisfy the needs of a text-mining system using in a 
specific scope. According to the introduction of DDI mechanism we mentioned in 
Subheading 1.1, the domain of PK DDI is concerned with the process of drug disposition 
within the organism, the response of drug level, and the kinetics of drug exposure to 
different tissue types. Even in different experimental studies, DDI is defined with distinct 
measurements. However, no single system is currently capable of covering a complete 
domain for all aspects. For this reason, we introduce an integrated PK ontology which is 
composed of several components: experiment, metabolism enzyme, transporter, drug, and 
subject. In this work, the primary contribution is the ontology development for the PK 
experiment and integration of the PK experiment ontology with other PK-related ontologies.
Experiment  specifies in vitro and in vivo PK studies and their associated PK parameters. The 
definitions and units for both in vitro or in vivo PK parameters and their corresponding 
experiment conditions should be included.
Within different types of in vitro PK experiments, different in vitro PK parameters  are 
employed.
•Single-drug metabolism experiment  includes Michaelis–Menten constant ( Km), 
maximum velocity of the enzyme activity ( Vmax), intrinsic clearance (CL int), 
metabolic ratio, and fraction of metabolism by an enzyme (fm enzyme ) [47].
•Single-drug transporter experiment : PK parameters include apparent permeability 
(Papp), ratio of the basolateral to apical permeability and apical to basolateral 
permeability (Re), radio-activity, and uptake volume [ 57].
•Drug interaction experiment : IC 50 is the inhibition concentration that inhibits to 50 
% enzyme activity; it is substrate dependent;and it does not imply the inhibition 
mechanism. Ki is the inhibition rate constant for competitive inhibition, 
noncompetitive inhibition, and uncompetitive inhibition. It represents the inhibition 
concentration that inhibits to 50 % enzyme activity, and it is substrate concentration 
independent. Kdeg is the degradation rate constant for the enzyme. KI is the 
concentration of inhibitor associated with half maximal inactivation in the 
mechanism-based inhibition; and Kinact is the maximum degradation rate constant 
in the presence of a high concentration of inhibitor in the mechanism-based 
inhibition. Emax is the maximum induction rate, and EC 50 is the concentration of 
inducer that is associated with the half maximal induction [ 15].
•Type of drug interaction : There are multiple drug interaction mechanisms, 
including competitive inhibition, noncompetitive inhibition, uncompetitive 
inhibition, mechanism-based inhibition, and induction [ 15].
For in vitro experiment conditions,  metabolism enzyme, transporter, and some other factors 
should be considered.Wu et al. Page 9
Methods Mol Biol . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 November 07.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript•Metabolism enzyme  experiment conditions include buffer, NADPH sources, and 
protein sources. In particular, protein sources include recombinant enzymes, 
microsomes, and hepatocytes. Sometimes, genotype information is available for the 
microsome or the hepatocyte samples.
•Transporter  experiment conditions include bidirectional transporter, uptake/efflux, 
and ATPase.
•Other factors  of in vitro experiments include preincubation time, incubation time, 
quantification methods, sample size, and data analysis methods.
All these information can be found in the FDA website ( http://www.abclabs.com/Portals/0/
FDAGuidance_DraftDrug  InteractionStudies2006.pdf).
Differed from in vitro study, in vivo refers to experimentation using a whole, living 
organism such that its experiment condition and parameters are quite different. Within in 
vivo study, in vivo PK parameters, pharmacokinetics models, study designs, and 
quantification methods are the key components to investigate an in vivo experiment.
•All of the information for in vivo PK parameters  is summarized from two text 
books [ 13, 51]. There are several main classes of PK parameters. Area under the 
concentration curve parameters are AUC inf, AUC SS, AUC t, and AUMC; drug 
clearance parameters are CL, CL b, CL u, CL H, CL R, CL po, CL IV, CL int, and CL 12; 
drug concentration parameters are Cmax and CSS; extraction ratio and 
bioavailability parameters are E, EH, F, FG, FH, FR, fe, and fm; rate constants 
include elimination rate constant k, absorption rate constant ka, urinary excretion 
rate constant ke, Michaelis–Menten constant Km, distribution rate constants ( k12, 
k21), and two rate constants in the two-compartment model ( λ1, λ2); blood flow rate 
(Q, QH); time parameters ( tmax, t1/2); volume distribution parameters ( V, Vb, V1, V2, 
Vss); maximum rate of metabolism, Vmax; and ratios of PK parameters that present 
the extent of the drug interaction (AUCR, CL ratio, Cmax ratio, Css ratio, t1/2 ratio).
•Two types of pharmacokinetics models  are usually presented in the literature: non-
compartment model and one- or two-compartment models.
•The design strategies  are very diverse: single arm or multiple arms, crossover or 
fixed-order design, with or without randomization, with or without stratification, 
pre-screening or no pre-screening based on genetic information, prospective or 
retrospective studies, and case reports or cohort studies. The sample size includes 
the number of subjects and the number of plasma or urine samples per subject. The 
time points include sampling time points and dosing time points. The sample type 
includes blood, plasma, and urine. The hypotheses include the effect of 
bioequivalence, drug interaction, pharmacogenetics, and disease conditions on a 
drug's PK.
•The drug quantification methods  include HPLC/UV, LC/MS/MS, LC/MS, and 
radiographic.Wu et al. Page 10
Methods Mol Biol . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 November 07.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author ManuscriptMetabolism enzyme— The cytochrome P450 (officially abbreviated as CYP) enzymes 
predominantly exist in the gut wall and liver. The CYP450 super family is a large and 
diverse group of enzymes that catalyze the oxidation of organic substances. The substrates 
of CYP enzymes include metabolic intermediates such as lipids and steroidal hormones as 
well as xenobiotic substances such as drugs and other toxic chemicals. CYPs are the major 
enzymes involved in drug metabolism and bioactivation, accounting for about 75 % of the 
total number of different metabolic reactions [ 58]. CYP enzyme names and genetic variants 
were mapped from the Human Cytochrome P450 (CYP) Allele Nomenclature Database 
(http://www.cypalleles.ki.se/ ). This site contains the CYP450 genetic mutation effect on the 
protein sequence and enzyme activity with associated references.
In the pharmacology research, probe drug is another important concept. An enzyme's probe 
substrate means that this substrate is primarily metabolized or transported by this enzyme. In 
order to experimentally prove whether a new drug inhibits or induces an enzyme, its probe 
substrate is always utilized to demonstrate this enzyme's activity before and after inhibition 
or induction. An enzyme's probe inhibitor or inducer means that it inhibits or induces this 
enzyme primarily. Similarly, an enzyme's probe inhibitor needs to be utilized if we 
investigate whether a drug is metabolized by this enzyme. Due to its importance, all the 
probe inhibitors, inducers, and substrates of CYP enzymes are also included in our PK 
ontology. All this information was collected from industry standard ( http://www.fda.gov/
Drugs/GuidanceComplianceRegulatoryInformation/Guidances/ucm064982.htm ), reviewed 
in the top pharmacology journal [ 16].
Transporters  are tissue specific. With different aliases, their tissue-specific transports and 
corresponding functions are different. Transport proteins  are proteins which serve the 
function of moving other materials within an organism. Transport proteins are vital to the 
growth and life of all living things. Transport proteins are involved in the movement of ions, 
small molecules, or macromolecules, such as another protein, across a biological membrane. 
They are integral membrane proteins; that is, they exist within and span the membrane 
across which they transport substances. Their names and genetic variants were mapped from 
the Transporter Classification Database ( http://www.tcdb.org ). In addition, we also added 
the probe substrates and probe inhibitors and inducers to each one of the metabolism and 
transportation enzymes [ 16].
Drug  names were created using the drug names from DrugBank 3.0 [ 27]. DrugBank consists 
of 6,829 drugs which can be grouped into different categories of FDA-approved, FDA-
approved biotech, nutraceuticals, and experimental drugs. The drug names are mapped to 
generic names, brand names, and synonyms.
Subject  included the existing ontologies for human disease ontology (DOID), suggested 
Ontology for Pharmacogenomics (SOPHARM), and mammalian phenotype (MP) from 
http://bioportal.bioontology.org .
The PK ontology was implemented with Protégé [ 59] and uploaded to the BioPortal 
ontology platform.Wu et al. Page 11
Methods Mol Biol . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 November 07.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript3.3 PK Corpus
Corpus is the key component to make NLP technologies successfully applied to text. To 
materialize text into computer-readable format, two types of annotations are needed, 
biological annotation and linguistic annotation [ 54]. Biological annotation belongs to event 
annotation, which identifies the location of biological information in the article. The scope 
of biological annotation can be narrowed down at single biological terms or broadened to 
include a whole sentence, which describes a biological event. Practically, event annotations 
are more complicated than term annotations. Term annotation only needs the terms to be 
annotated and hierarchically organized into categories. Unlike term annotation, an event has 
its own internal structure and it also involves biological entities (from term annotation) as its 
participants. Therefore, well-defined conditions to call biological events are required. On the 
other hand, linguistic annotation gives linguistic parsing such as POS or syntactic trees to 
know the type and role of term in natural language. The main purpose of linguistic 
annotation is to use it in the study of language through analysis of natural-occurring data. It 
involves computational methods and tools for analyzing linguistic pattern IR based on 
annotated corpora.
Most existing DDI extraction methods are designed to capture pairs of drugs that have the 
relation of interaction via semantic interpretation. There is one gap if we continue to use the 
same method for extracting DDI information from a pharmacokinetics perspective. The gap 
comes from the lack of knowledge to define a PK DDI. Pharmacokinetics parameters and 
knowledge from in vitro and in vivo DDI experimental designs, especially the selection of 
enzyme-specific probe substrates and inhibitors, should be considered. For instance, 
important pharmacokinetic parameters such as Ki, IC50, and AUCR have not been included 
in the existing text mining approaches to DDI. This kind of pharmacokinetic information 
may be particularly relevant when seeking evidence of causal mechanisms behind DDIs and 
as a complement to DDI text mining of patient records.
3.3.1 Corpus Construction— A PK abstract corpus was constructed to cover four 
primary classes of PK studies: clinical PK studies ( n = 56); clinical pharmacogenetic studies 
(n = 57); in vivo DDI studies ( n = 218); and in vitro drug interaction studies ( n = 210). The 
PK corpus construction is a manual process. The abstracts of clinical PK studies related to 
the most popular CYP3A substrate, midazolam, were investigated [ 60]. The clinical 
pharmacogenetic abstracts were selected based on the most polymorphic CYP enzyme, 
CYP2D6. We think that these two selection strategies represent very well all the in vivo PK 
and PG studies. In searching for the drug interaction studies, the abstracts were randomly 
selected from a PubMed query, which used probe substrates/inhibitors/inducers for 
metabolism enzymes.
Once the abstracts have been identified in four classes, their annotation is a manual process 
(Fig. 1). The annotation was firstly carried out by three master-level annotators (Shreyas 
Karnik, Abhinita Subhadarshini, and Xu Han) and one Ph.D. annotator (Lang Li). They have 
different training backgrounds: computational science, biological science, and 
pharmacology. Any differentially annotated terms were further checked by Sara K. Quinney 
and David A. Flockhart, one Pharm D. scientist and one M.D. scientist with extensive Wu et al. Page 12
Methods Mol Biol . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 November 07.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscriptpharmacology training background. Among the disagreed annotations between these two 
annotators, a group review was conducted (Drs Quinney, Flockhart, and Li) to reach the 
final agreed annotations. In addition a random subset of 20 % of the abstracts that had 
consistent annotations among four annotators (three masters and one Ph.D.) were double 
checked by two Ph.D.-level scientists.
3.3.2 DDI Annotation Scheme— A structured annotation scheme was implemented to 
annotate three layers of pharmacokinetics information: key terms, DDI sentences, and DDI 
pairs (Fig. 2). DDI sentence annotation scheme depends on the key terms; and DDI 
annotations depend on the key terms and DDI sentences. Their annotation schemes are 
described as follows.
Term-level annotation: Key terms include drug names, enzyme names, PK parameters, 
numbers, mechanisms, and change. The boundaries of these terms among different 
annotators were judged by the following standard.
•Drug names  were defined mainly on DrugBank 3.0 [ 27]. In addition, drug 
metabolites were also tagged, because they are important in in vitro studies. The 
metabolites were judged by either prefix or suffix: oxi, hydroxyl, methyl, acetyl, N-
dealkyl, N-demethyl, nor, dihydroxy, O-dealkyl, and sulfo. These prefixes and 
suffixes are due to the reactions due to phase I metabolism (oxidation, reduction, 
hydrolysis) and phase II metabolism (methylation, sulfation, acetylation, 
glucuronidation) [ 55].
•Enzyme names  covered all the CYP450 enzymes. Their names are defined in the 
Human Cytochrome P450 Allele Nomenclature Database, http://
www.cypalleles.ki.se/ . The variations of the enzyme or the gene names were 
considered.
•PK parameters  were annotated based on the defined in vitro and in vivo PK 
parameter ontology. In addition, some PK parameters have different names, such as 
CL = clearance, t1/2 = half-life, AUC = area under the concentration curve, and 
AUCR = area under the concentration curve ratio. Those terms need to be handled 
carefully because their formats are varied.
•Numbers  such as dose, sample size, values of PK parameters, and p-values were all 
annotated. If presented, their units were also covered in the annotations.
•Mechanisms  denote the drug metabolism and interaction mechanisms. Linguistic 
realization of those terms is usually presented in various contexts. The 
nominalization of the following terms, inhibit, catalyze, correlate, metabolize, 
induce, form, stimulate, activate, and suppress, is annotated with regular expression 
patterns.
•Change  describes the change of PK parameters. The following words and its 
nominalizations were annotated in the corpus to denote the change: strong, 
moderate, high, slight, significant, obvious, marked, great, pronounced, modest, 
probably, may, might minor, little negligible, doesn't interact, affect, reduce, and 
increase.Wu et al. Page 13
Methods Mol Biol . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 November 07.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author ManuscriptSentence-level annotation: The middle-level annotation focused on the drug interaction 
sentences. Because two interaction drugs were not necessary all presented in the sentence, 
sentences were categorized into two classes:
•Clear DDI sentence  (CDDIS) : Two drug names (or drug–enzyme pair in the in 
vitro study) are in the sentence with a clear interaction statement, i.e., either 
“interaction” or “non-interaction”, or ambiguous statement (i.e., such as “possible 
interaction” or “might interact”).
•Vague DDI sentence  (VDDIS) : One drug or enzyme name is missed in the DDI 
sentence, but it can be inferred from the context. Clear interaction statement also is 
required.
DDI-level annotation: Once DDI sentences were labeled, the DDI pairs in the sentences 
were further annotated. Because of the fundamental difference between in vivo DDI studies 
and in vitro DDI studies, their DDI relationships were defined differently. In in vivo studies, 
three types of DDI relationships were defined (Table 1): DDI, ambiguous DDI (ADDI), and 
non-DDI (NDDI). Four conditions are specified to determine these DDI relationships. 
Condition 1 (C1) requires that at least one drug or enzyme name has to be contained in the 
sentence; condition 2 (C2) requires that the other interaction drug or enzyme name can be 
found from the context if it is not from the same sentence; condition 3 (C3) specifies 
numeric rules to define the DDI relationships based on the PK parameter changes; and 
condition 4 (C4) specifies the language expression patterns for DDI relationships. Using the 
rules summarized in Table 1, DDI, ADDI, and NDDI can be defined by C1 ∧ C2 ∧ (C3 ∨ 
C4). The priority rank of in vivo PK parameters is AUC > CL > t1/2 > Cmax. In in vitro 
studies, six types of DDI relationships were defined (Table 1). DDI, ADDI, and NDDI were 
similar to in vivo DDIs, but three more drug–enzyme relationships were further defined: 
DEI, ambiguous DEI (ADEI), and non-DDI (NDEI). C1, C2, and C4 remained the same for 
in vitro DDIs. The main difference is in C3, in which either Ki or IC 50 (inhibition) or EC 50 
(induction) was used to defined DDI relationship quantitatively. The priority rank of in vitro 
PK parameters is Ki > IC 50. Table 2 presents eight examples of how DDIs or DEIs were 
determined in the sentences.
Corpus evaluation: Agreement measurement is one of the important steps in corpus 
construction, which carries out the assessment of reference standard quality. If there is little 
agreements among annotators, that means that the task of annotation is not reliable and the 
quality of reference standard is suspected. In this work, Krippendorff's alpha [ 61] was 
calculated to evaluate the reliability of annotations from four annotators. The frequencies of 
key terms, DDI sentences, and DDI pairs are presented in Table 3. Their Krippendorff's 
alphas are 0.953, 0.921, and 0.905, respectively. Please note that the total DDI pairs refer to 
the total pairs of drugs within a DDI sentence from all DDI sentences.
The PK corpus was constructed by the following process. Raw abstracts were downloaded 
from PubMed in XML format. Then XML files were converted into GENIA corpus format 
following the gpml.dtd from the GENIA corpus [ 31]. The sentence detection in this step is 
accomplished by using the Perl module Lingua ∷ EN∷Sentence, which was downloaded 
from the Comprehensive Perl Archive Network (CPAN, www.cpan.org ). GENIA corpus Wu et al. Page 14
Methods Mol Biol . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 November 07.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscriptfiles were then tagged with the prescribed three levels of PK and DDI annotations. Finally, a 
cascading style sheet (CSS) was implemented to differentiate colors for the entities in the 
corpus. This feature allows the users to visualize annotated entities. We would like to 
acknowledge that a DDI corpus was recently published as part of a text-mining competition 
DDIExtraction 2011 ( http://labda.inf.uc3m.es/DDIExtraction2011/dataset.html ). Their DDIs 
were clinical outcome oriented, not PK oriented. They were extracted from DrugBank, not 
from PubMed abstracts. Our PK corpus complements to their corpus very well.
3.4 DDI Text Mining
We implemented the approach described by [ 37] for the DDI extraction. Prior to performing 
DDI extraction, the testing and validation DDI abstracts in our corpus were preprocessed 
and converted into the unified XML format [ 37]. The following steps were conducted:
•Drugs were tagged in each of the sentences using dictionary based on DrugBank. 
This step revised our prescribed drug name annotations in the corpus. One purpose 
is to reduce the redundant synonymous drug names. The other purpose is only to 
keep the parent drugs and remove the drug metabolites from the tagged drug names 
from our initial corpus, because parent drugs and their metabolites rarely interact. 
In addition, enzymes (i.e., CYPs) were also tagged as drugs, since enzyme–drug 
interactions have been extensively studied and published. The regular expression of 
enzyme names in our corpus was used to remove the redundant synonymous gene 
names.
•Each of the sentences was subjected to tokenization, POS tags, and dependency 
tree generation using the Stanford parser [ 62].
•C2n drug pairs from the tagged drugs in a sentence were generated automatically, 
and they were assigned with default labels as no-drug interaction. Please note that 
if a sentence had only one drug name, this sentence did not have a DDI. This setup 
limited us to consider only CDDI sentence in our corpus.
•The drug interaction labels were then manually flipped based on their true drug 
interaction annotations from the corpus. Please note that our corpus had annotated 
DDIs, ADDIs, NDDIs, DEIs, ADEIs, and NDEIs. Here only DDIs and DEIs were 
labeled as true DDIs. The other ADDIs, NDDIs, DEIs, and ADEIs were all 
categorized into the no-drug interactions.
Then sentences were represented with dependency graphs using interacting components 
(drugs) (Fig. 3). The graph representation of the sentence was composed of two items: (1) 
one dependency graph structure of the sentence and (2) a sequence of POS tags (which was 
transformed to a linear order “graph” by connecting the tags with a constant edge weight). 
We used the Stanford parser [ 62] to generate the dependency graphs. Airola et al. proposed 
to combine these two graphs to one weighted, directed graph. This graph was fed into a 
SVM for DDI/non-DDI classification. More details about the all paths graph kernel 
algorithm can be found in [ 37].
DDI extraction was implemented in the in vitro and in vivo DDI corpus separately. Table 4 
presents the training sample size and testing sample size in both corpus sets. Then Table 5 Wu et al. Page 15
Methods Mol Biol . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 November 07.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscriptpresents the DDI extraction performance. In extracting in vivo DDI pairs, the precision, 
recall, and F-measure in the testing set are 0.67, 0.79, and 0.73, respectively. In the in vitro 
DDI extraction analysis, the precision, recall, and F-measure are 0.47, 0.58, and 0.52, 
respectively, in the in vitro testing set. In our early DDI research published in the 
DDIExtract 2011 Challenge [ 63], we used the same algorithm to extract both in vitro and in 
vivo DDIs at the same time, and the reported F-measure was 0.66. This number is in the 
middle of our current in vivo DDI extraction F-measure 0.73 and in vitro DDI extraction F-
measure 0.52.
Error analysis was performed in testing samples. Table 6 summarizes the results. Among the 
known reasons for the false positives and false negatives, the most frequent one is that there 
are multiple drugs in the sentence or the sentence is long. The other reasons include that 
there is no direct DDI relationship between two drugs, but the presence of some words, such 
as dose and increase, may lead to a false-positive prediction; or DDI is presented in an 
indirect way; or some NDDIs are inferred due to some adjectives (little, minor, negligible).
4 Notes (Challenges and Possible Solutions)
As we have seen, there had been a number of approaches for DDI extraction research. 
Nonetheless, there are significant unsolved problems or difficulties when we apply those 
approaches in PK DDI text mining. According to our annotation scheme, the three-level 
annotation is designed to identify key terms, DDI sentences, and DDI pairs. From our DDI 
extraction error analysis, we found that major errors come from the challenges of 
annotations. Most missing detections result from the issue of drug name mapping in term 
annotation level. The reason to cause the errors classified into the third category is that the 
approach we use to extract DDI lacks the ability of co-reference resolution. Due to the 
omission of VDDIS in DDI sentence level, these kinds of errors happen. Finally, a major 
part of failure resulted largely from the long sentences with multiple drugs and PK 
parameters. To meet these three issues, we discuss the problem of errors and try to explore 
their possible solution in the following three subsections.
4.1 Issues in Drug Name Mapping
In term annotation level, most biological terms can be annotated with satisfied performance 
by using NER, except for drug name. The representations of drug names are diverse in 
pharmacology articles. The main reason to this issue comes from the naming convention of 
different drug companies. Each drug with the same generic name might have multiple brand 
names or synonym name. Due to the different backgrounds of authors, the preferences of 
name adoption are quite different. Among drug names, some really confuse NER tools by its 
confliction with other terms. For example, one of ketoconazole's synonyms (DB01026) is “2 
%” and a small molecule (db03951) is denominated with “16 g.” For the possible solution 
for this issue, we recommend to remove those terms from your dictionaries because few 
authors use those peculiar terms as drug names. Another issue in NER is to recognize 
acronym and abbreviation of drugs or other terms. There are no rules or exact patterns for 
the creation of acronym and abbreviation from their full form. To meet this problem, there 
are two possible solutions. First, parenthetical expression might be the solution to 
distinguish acronyms. By using Schwartz and Hearst's algorithm, it searches for parentheses Wu et al. Page 16
Methods Mol Biol . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 November 07.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscriptin text and limits context around brackets as a mark of term, such as single or more words, 
e.g., nevi-rapine (NVP) or human liver microsomes (HLMs). Otherwise, using FDA-
provided acronym and abbreviation database as another dictionary can be the second 
solution. This database can be downloaded at the following link: http://www.fda.gov/
AboutFDA/FDAAcronymsAbbreviations/ucm070296.htm .
4.2 Vague DDI Sentence Problem
In most DDI extraction approaches, CDDIS are considered to be candidates for the analysis 
of DDI extraction. Nevertheless, we found that the number of VDDISs amounts to one-tenth 
of CDDISs' quantity in Table 3. If we omit investigating those sentences, it means that up to 
10 % of true information is possibly missed. Although this problem also happens in many 
articles related to protein–protein or protein–gene interactions, it harms PK DDI articles 
more. It is because the interactions between proteins or genes are more often expressed with 
narrative ways while many of PK DDIs in text can be determined only with the 
measurements of ADME activities. Such omissions will highly increase the chance of 
missing detections, especially for the task of PK curation.
To retrieve VDDIS, human beings can easily recognize DDI information from VDDIS via 
the reference to other sentences. The process of determining the pronoun or the antecedent 
from its context is called co-reference resolution [ 64]. Some previous works [ 65, 66] had 
considered this problem on a pre-sentence basis and used it to explore neglected useful 
information in the same article. Grosz et al. [ 67] considered the feature of significant entities 
which are mentioned multiple times in context and its transitivity property to extract event–
argument relations. But no one has yet considered using it to improve the performance of 
DDI extraction. Here we would like to choose one appropriate approach among published 
co-reference resolution method to transform the VDDIS into CDDIS.
Bridging references arise when a reference to a noun phrase that is not directly mentioned is 
made. For an example sentence in PMID-17518508 (example 1), it does not mention that 
which drug is the CYP3A4 inhibitor in the sentence, but readers can figure out that it is 
ketoconazole from few sentences before. Another type of VDDIS is more challenging to 
determine because the noun phrase and pronoun are not even mentioned in the sentence of 
PMID-17909805 (example 2). The pronoun or the antecedent for inhibitor drug even does 
not show in this sentence, and its argument is located in few sentences behind, which makes 
it more difficult to find its co-reference.
Example 1— Co-administration of a potent C ϒP3A4 inhibitor  moderately increased 
cinacalcet exposure in study subject.
Example 2— The plasma clearances of docetaxel and midazolam were reduced by 1.7-and 
6-fold, respectively.
Centering theory [ 66, 68, 69] is a method to model the relations among focus of attention, 
choice of referring expression, and perceived coherence of utterances within a discourse 
segment. This approach should conquer the problem of example 1. As for the second 
example, it cannot be answered by only finding the co- reference of pronoun. Finding the Wu et al. Page 17
Methods Mol Biol . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 November 07.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscriptrelation between an event and its argument across co-reference relations will really help find 
the argument of events. To achieve the cross-sentence event–argument relation, some 
previous works [ 67, 70] had been capable of identifying the event for intra-sentence 
argument. To handle the challenges in both examples, we are eager to look for a method 
which reaches the best performance.
4.3 Multiple Drug Pairs and PK parameters
The purpose of DDI-level annotation is to label drug pairs and PK parameters in text and 
conduct the relationships for DDI pairs. From the experience of evaluating corpus and the 
error analysis for DDI results, there are two challenges when extracting DDI. (1) Long 
sentences with multiple drugs significantly complicated syntactic structure and led to the 
most frequent faults of first category in Table 6. In fact, such sentences often occurred in the 
articles related to in vivo and in vitro experiments. Authors try to compare the intensity of 
drug interactions among different drugs and place their PK parameters as well as dose 
conditions after. (2) How to take advantage of PK parameters for DDI extraction is another 
challenge. In the previous works, machine learning-based approach deals with the task of 
extracting relations by classifying pairs of drug with/without DDI categories, while rule-
based or pattern-based method locates drug pairs as well as trigger words to build up a tree 
for determining their relationship. But, no one has yet considered using it to improve the 
performance of DDI extraction.
To overcome both the problem of multiple drugs and PK parameters and the challenge of 
utilizing PK parameters, simplifying sentence is an idea that came from Segura-Bedmar's 
method [ 43], which split the long sentences into clauses from which relations are extracted 
by a pattern matching algorithm. Such a simplification significantly improves the 
performance of dealing with long sentences. This inspires us to split a long sentence with 
different way. According to the characteristics of utterances in PK articles, the orders and 
locations of drug names and their corresponding PK parameters are parallelly located. The 
example in Fig. 3 shows that there are three different drugs interacting one drug followed by 
the corresponding fold change of AUC value. But when looking into its structure of 
dependent graph tree which is often used for machine learning- or rule-based pattern (Fig. 
4), we found that both drugs and PK values are connected with conj_and  edge. It is not 
possible to differentiate which PK value is belonging to which drug. Thus, splitting the 
sentence according to drugs and PK parameters before machine learning-or rule-based 
pattern matching is necessary. Using example 3 as an instance, we hope that the sentence 
can break down into three sentences (examples 3.1, 3.2, and 3.3 in Fig. 4). This separation 
greatly simplifies the sentences' complexity and resolves the problem of matching PK 
parameters.
Example 3— Drug_A, Drug_B, and Drug_C produced increases in mean Drug_D AUC of 
150, 419, and 122 %, respectively.
Acknowledgments
This work is supported by the US National Institutes of Health grant R01 GM74217 (Lang Li).Wu et al. Page 18
Methods Mol Biol . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 November 07.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author ManuscriptReferences
1. Second Annual Adverse Drug/Biologic Reaction Report. US Food and Drug Administration; 1987. 
2. Becker ML, et al. Hospitalisations and emergency department visits due to drug–drug interactions: a 
literature review. Pharmacoepidemiol Drug Saf. 2007; 16:641–651. [PubMed: 17154346] 
3. Chou TC. Theoretical basis, experimental design, and computerized simulation of synergism and 
antagonism in drug combination studies. Pharmacol Rev. 2006; 58(3):621–681. [PubMed: 
16968952] 
4. Magro L, Moretti U, Leone R. Epidemiology and characteristics of adverse drug reactions caused by 
drug–drug interactions. Expert Opin Drug Saf. 2012; 11(1):83–94. [PubMed: 22022824] 
5. Juurlink DN, et al. Drug–drug interactions among elderly patients hospital ized for drug toxicity. 
JAMA. 2003; 289(13):1652–1658. [PubMed: 12672733] 
6. Merle L, et al. Predicting and preventing adverse drug reactions in the very old. Drugs Aging. 2005; 
22(5):375–392. [PubMed: 15903351] 
7. Johansson I, Ingelman-Sundberg M. Genetic polymorphism and toxicology: with emphasis on 
cytochrome p450. Toxicol Sci. 2011; 120(1):1–13. [PubMed: 21149643] 
8. Ajayi FO, Sun H, Perry J. Adverse drug reactions: a review of relevant factors. J Clin Pharmacol. 
2000; 40(10):1093–1101. [PubMed: 11028248] 
9. DiMasi JA, Grabowski HG. The cost of biopharmaceutical R&D: is biotech different? Manage 
Decis Econ. 2007; 28:469–479.
10. Pang, KS.; Rodrigues, AD.; Peter, RM. Enzyme- and transporter-based drug–drug interactions. 
Vol. 746. Springer; New York: 2010. 
11. The European Medicines Agency. Guideline on the investigation of drug interactions. The 
European Medicines Agency; London: 2012. 
12. Jia J, et al. Mechanisms of drug combinations: interaction and network perspectives. Nat Rev Drug 
Discov. 2009; 8(2):111–128. [PubMed: 19180105] 
13. Rowland, M.; Tozer, TN. Clinical pharmacokinetics: concepts and applications. Lippincott 
Williams & Wilkins; London: 1995. 
14. Wienkers LC, Heath TG. Predicting in vivo drug interactions from in vitro drug discovery data. 
Nat Rev Drug Discov. 2005; 4(10):825–833. [PubMed: 16224454] 
15. Rostami-Hodjegan A, Tucker G. ‘In silico’ simulations to assess the ‘in vivo’ consequences of ‘in 
vitro’ metabolic drug– drug interactions. Drug Discov Today. 2004; 1(4):441–448.
16. Huang SM, et al. Drug interaction studies: study design, data analysis, and implications for dosing 
and labeling. Clin Pharmacol Ther. 2007; 81(2):298–304. [PubMed: 17259955] 
17. Li L, Yu M, Chin R, Lucksiri A, Flockhart D, Hall S. Drug–drug interaction prediction: a Bayesian 
meta-analysis approach. Stat Med. 2007; 26(20):3700–3721. [PubMed: 17357990] 
18. Yu M, et al. A Bayesian meta-analysis on published sample mean and variance pharmacokinetic 
data with application to drug–drug interaction prediction. J Biopharm Stat. 2008; 18(6):1063–
1083. [PubMed: 18991108] 
19. Zhou J, et al. A new probabilistic rule for drug–drug interaction prediction. J Pharmacokinet 
Pharmacodyn. 2009; 36:1–18. [PubMed: 19156505] 
20. Zhou J, Qin Z, Kim S, Wang Z, Hall DS, Li L. Drug–drug interaction prediction assessment. J 
Pharmacokinet Pharmacodyn. 2009; 19:641–657.
21. Wang Z, Kim S, Quinney SK, Zhou J, Li L. Non-compartment model/compartment model 
transformation. BMC System Biol. 2010; 4(1):S8. [PubMed: 20522258] 
22. Li L. Discussion on parameter estimation for differential equations: a generalized smoothing 
approach. J Royal Stat Soc B. 2007; 69:787–788.
23. Chien JY, Lucksiri A, Ernest CS, Gorski JC, Wrighton SA, Hall SD. Stochastic prediction of 
CYP3A-mediated inhibition of midazolam clearance by ketoconazole. Drug Metab Dispos. 2006; 
34(7):1208–1219. [PubMed: 16611859] 
24. Quinney SK, Zhang X, Lucksiri A, Gorski JC, Li L, et al. Physiologically based pharma-cokinetic 
model of mechanism-based inhibition of CYP3A by clarithromycin. Drug Metab Dispos. 2010; 
38(2):241–248. [PubMed: 19884323] Wu et al. Page 19
Methods Mol Biol . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 November 07.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript25. Hachad H, Ragueneau-Majlessi I, Levy RH. A useful tool for drug interaction evaluation: the 
University of Washington Metabolism and Transport Drug Interaction Database. Hum Genomics. 
2010; 5(1):61–72. [PubMed: 21106490] 
26. Hewett M, et al. PharmGKB: the pharmacogenetics knowledge base. Nucleic Acids Res. 2002; 
30(1):163–165. [PubMed: 11752281] 
27. Knox C, et al. DrugBank 3.0: a comprehensive resource for ‘omics’ research on drugs. Nucleic 
Acids Res. 2011; 39(Database issue):D1035–D1041. [PubMed: 21059682] 
28. Gottlieb A, et al. INDI: a computational framework for inferring drug interactions and their 
associated recommendations. Mol Syst Biol. 2012; 8:592. [PubMed: 22806140] 
29. Nadkarni PM, Ohno-Machado L, Chapman WW. Natural language processing: an introduction. J 
Am Med Inform Assoc. 2011; 18:544–551. [PubMed: 21846786] 
30. Zweigenbaum P, et al. Frontiers of biomedical text mining: current progress. Brief Bioinform. 
2007; 8(5):358–375. [PubMed: 17977867] 
31. Kim JD, et al. GENIA corpus–semantically annotated corpus for bio-text mining. Bioinformatics. 
2003; 19(Suppl 1):i180–i182. [PubMed: 12855455] 
32. Wilbur WJ, Rzhetsky A, Shatkay H. New directions in biomedical text annotation: definitions, 
guidelines and corpus construction. BMC Bioinformatics. 2006; 7:356. [PubMed: 16867190] 
33. Muller HM, Kenny EE, Sternberg PW. Textpresso: an ontology-based information retrieval and 
extraction system for biological literature. PLoS Biol. 2004; 2(11):e309. [PubMed: 15383839] 
34. Feldman R, et al. Mining biomedical literature using information extraction. Curr Drug Discov. 
2002; 2:19–23.
35. Fundel K, Küffner R, Zimmer R. RelEx: relation extraction using dependency parse trees. 
Bioinformatics. 2007; 23:365–371. [PubMed: 17142812] 
36. Qian L, Zhou G. Tree kernel-based protein–protein interaction extraction from biomedical 
literature. J Biomed Inform. 2012; 45(3):535–543. [PubMed: 22388011] 
37. Airola A, et al. All-paths graph kernel for protein–protein interaction extraction with evaluation of 
cross-corpus learning. BMC Bioinformatics. 2008; 9(Suppl 11):S2. [PubMed: 19025688] 
38. Pyysalo S, et al. Comparative analysis of five protein–protein interaction corpora. BMC 
Bioinformatics. 2008; 9(Suppl 3):S6. [PubMed: 18426551] 
39. Tikk D, et al. A comprehensive benchmark of kernel methods to extract protein– protein 
interactions from literature. PLoS Comput Biol. 2010; 6:e1000837. [PubMed: 20617200] 
40. Chen Y, Liu F, Manderick B. Normalizing interactor proteins and extracting interaction protein 
pairs using support vector machines. BioCreative II 5 Workshop 2009 on Digital Annotations. 
2009
41. Zhou D, He Y. Extracting interactions between proteins from the literature. J Biomed Inform. 
2008; 41(2):393–407. [PubMed: 18207462] 
42. Krallinger M, Leitner F, Valencia A. The BioCreative II.5 challenge overview. Proceedings of the 
BioCreative II 5 Workshop 2009 on Digital Annotations. 2009
43. Segura-Bedmar I, Martinez P, de Pablo-Sanchez C. A linguistic rule-based approach to extract 
drug–drug interactions from pharmacological documents. BMC Bioinformatics. 2011; 12(Suppl 
2):S1. [PubMed: 21489220] 
44. Segura-Bedmar, I.; Martinez, P.; Sanchez-Cisneros, D. Proceedings of the 1st challenge task on 
drug–drug interaction extraction 2011. Spain: 2011. The 1st DDIExtraction-2011 challenge task: 
extraction of drug–drug interactions from biomedical texts. 
45. Percha B, Garten Y, Altman RB. Discovery and explanation of drug–drug interactions via text 
mining. Pac Symp Biocomput. 2012:410–421. [PubMed: 22174296] 
46. Tari L, et al. Discovering drug–drug interactions: a text-mining and reasoning approach based on 
properties of drug metabolism. Bioinformatics. 2010; 26(18):i547–i553. [PubMed: 20823320] 
47. Segel, IH. Enzyme kinetics: behavior and analysis of rapid equilibrium and steady state enzyme 
systems. Wiley; New York: 1975. 
48. Consortium IT. Membrane transporters in drug development. Nat Rev Drug Discov. 2010; 9(3):
215–236. [PubMed: 20190787] Wu et al. Page 20
Methods Mol Biol . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 November 07.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript49. Rostami-Hodjegan A, Tucker G. In silico simulations to assess the in vivo consequences of in vitro 
metabolic drug–drug interactions. Drug Disc Today Technol. 2004; 1:441–448.
50. Lam YW, Alfaro CL, Ereshefsky L, Miller M. Pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic interactions 
of oral midazolam with ketoconazole, fluoxetine, fluvoxamine, and nefazodone. J Clin Pharmacol. 
2003; 43(11):1274–1282. [PubMed: 14551182] 
51. Gibaldi, M.; Perrier, D. Pharmacokinetics. 2nd. Marcel Dekker; New York: 1982. 
52. Vazquez M, et al. Text mining for drugs and chemical compounds: methods, tools and 
applications. Mol Inform. 2011; 30:506–519.
53. Spasic I, et al. Text mining and ontologies in biomedicine: making sense of raw text. Brief 
Bioinform. 2005; 6(3):239–251. [PubMed: 16212772] 
54. Kim JD, Ohta T, Tsujii J. Corpus annotation for mining biomedical events from literature. BMC 
Bioinformatics. 2008; 9:10. [PubMed: 18182099] 
55. Brunton, LL.; Chabner, BA.; Knollmann, BC. Goodman & Gilman's the pharmacological basis of 
therapeutics. 12th. McGraw-Hill; New York: 2011. 
56. Witte, R.; Kappler, T.; Baker, CJO. Ontology design for biomedical text mining, in semantic Web: 
revolutionizing knowledge discovery in the life sciences. Springer; USA: 2007. p. 281-313.
57. Giacomini KM, et al. Membrane transporters in drug development. Nat Rev Drug Discov. 2010; 
9(3):215–236. [PubMed: 20190787] 
58. Guengerich FP. Cytochrome p450 and chemical toxicology. Chem Res Toxicol. 2008; 21(1):70–
83. [PubMed: 18052394] 
59. Rubin DL, Noy NF, Musen MA. Protege: a tool for managing and using terminology in radiology 
applications. J Digit Imaging. 2007; 20(Suppl 1):34–46. [PubMed: 17687607] 
60. Wang Z, et al. Literature mining on pharmacokinetics numerical data: a feasibility study. J Biomed 
Inform. 2009; 42(4):726–735. [PubMed: 19345282] 
61. Krippendorff, K. Content analysis: an introduction to its methodology. SAGE; Thousand Oaks, 
CA: 2004. 
62. de Marneffe MC, MacCartney B, Manning CD. Generating typed dependency parses from phrase 
structure parses. LREC. 2006
63. Karnik, S., et al. The 1st challenge task on drug–drug interaction extraction. Huelva, Spain: 2011. 
Extraction of drug–drug interactions using all paths graph kernel. 
64. van Deemter K, Kibble R. On core ferring: coreference in muc and related annotation schemes. 
Comput Linguist. 2000; 26(4):629–637.
65. Hobbs, J. Resolving pronoun references Readings in natural language processing. Morgan 
Kaufmann Publishers Inc.; San Francisco, CA, USA: 1986. p. 339-352.
66. Grosz BJ, Weinstein S, Joshi AK. Centering: a framework for modeling the local coherence of 
discourse. Comput Linguist. 1995; 21(2):203–225.
67. Yoshikawa K, et al. Coreference based event-argument relation extraction on biomedical text. J 
Biomed Semantics. 2011; 2(Suppl 5):S6. [PubMed: 22166257] 
68. Brennan, SE.; Friedman, MW.; Pollard, CJ. Proceedings of the 25th annual meeting on Association 
for Computational Linguistics. Morristown, NJ, USA: 1987. A centering approach to pronouns. 
69. Elango, P. Coreference resolution: a survey. University of Wisconsin; Madison, WI: 2005. 
70. Lee H, et al. Deterministic coreference resolution based on entity-centric, precision-ranked rules. 
Comput Linguist. 2013; 34(4):885–916.Wu et al. Page 21
Methods Mol Biol . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 November 07.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author ManuscriptFig. 1. PK corpus annotation flow chartWu et al. Page 22
Methods Mol Biol . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 November 07.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author ManuscriptFig. 2. A three-level hierarchical PK and DDI annotation schemeWu et al. Page 23
Methods Mol Biol . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 November 07.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author ManuscriptFig. 3. Sentence separationWu et al. Page 24
Methods Mol Biol . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 November 07.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author ManuscriptFig. 4. Dependency graph tree of example 3Wu et al. Page 25
Methods Mol Biol . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 November 07.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author ManuscriptAuthor Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author ManuscriptWu et al. Page 26Table 1
DDI definitions in corpus
DDI relationship C1 C2 C3bC4b
In vivo study
DDI Yes YesThe PK parameter with the highest prioritya must satisfy p-value < 0.05 and FC > 1.50 or FC < 
0.67Significant, obviously, markedly, greatly, 
pronouncedly, etc.
Ambiguous DDI (ADDI)The PK parameter with the highest prioritya in the conditions of p-value < 0.05 but 0.67 <FC < 
1.50; or FC>1.50 or FC < 0.67, but p-value >0.05Modestly, moderately, probably, may, might, etc.
Non-DDI (NDDI)The PK parameter with the highest prioritya is in the condition of p-value > 0.05 and 0.67 < FC < 
1.50Minor significance, slightly, little or negligible 
effect, does not interact, etc.
In vitro study
DDI DEI Yes Yes (0 < Ki< 10 or 0 < EC 50 < 10 μM, and p-value < 0.05) Significant, obviously, markedly, greatly, 
pronouncedly, etc.
ADDI Ambiguous DEI (ADEI) (10< Ki<100 or 10<EC 50<100 μM, and p-value <0.05 or vice versa) Modestly, moderately, probably, may, might, etc.
NDDI Non-DEI (NDEI) (Ki>100 μM or EC 50>100 μM, and p-value >0.05) Minor significance, slightly, little or negligible 
effect, does not interact, etc.
Note :
C1: At least one drug or enzyme name has to be contained in the sentence
C2: Need to label the drug name if it is not from the same sentence
C3: PK parameter and value dependent
C4: Significance statement
aFor the priority of PK parameters: AUC > CL > t1/2 > Cmax; the priority of in vitro PK parameters: Ki>IC50.
bPriority issue: When C3 and C4 occur and conflict, C3 dominates the sentence
Methods Mol Biol . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 November 07.Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author ManuscriptWu et al. Page 27Table 2
Examples of DDI definitions
PMID DDI sentence Relationship and commend
20012601 The pharmacokinetic parameters of verapamil were significantly  altered by the co-administration of 
lovastatin  compared to the controlBecause of the words, “significantly,” (verapamil, lovastatin) is a DDI
20209646 The clearance  of mitoxantrone  and etoposide  was decreased  by 64 and 60 %,  respectively, when 
combined with valspodarBecause the fold changes were less than 0.67 ( mitoxantrone, valspodar ) and 
(etoposide, valspodar ) are DDIs
20012601 The ( AUC (0-infinity) ) of norverapamil  and the terminal half-life  of verapamil did not significantly 
changed  with lovastatin  co-administrationBecause of the words, “not significantly changed,” ( verapamil, lovastatin ) is an 
NDDI
17304149 Compared with placebo, itraconazole  treatment significantly increases  the peak plasma concentration 
(Cmax ) of paroxetine by 1.3-fold  (6.7 ±2.5 versus 9.0 ±3.3 ng/mL, p≤ 0.05 ) and the area under the 
plasma concentration–time curve from zero to 48 h ( AUC (0–48)) of paroxetine  by 1.5-fold  (137 ±73 
versus 199 ±91 ng×*h/mL, p≤0.01 )AUC has a higher rank than Cmax, and it had a 1.5-fold change and less than 
0.05 p-value;  thus, ( itraconazole, paroxetine ) is a DDI
13129991 The mean (SD) urinary ratio  of dextromethorphan  to its metabolite was 0.006  (0.010) at baseline and 
0.014  (0.025) after St John's wort  administration ( p= 0.26 )The change in PK parameter is more than 1.5-fold but p-value is >0.05. Thus, 
(dextromethorphan, St John's wort) is an ADDI
19904008 The obtained results show that perazine  at its therapeutic concentrations is a potent inhibitor  of human 
CϒP1A2Because of the word, “potent inhibitor,” (perazine, CYP1A2) is a DEI
19230594 After human hepatocytes were exposed to 10 μM ϒM758,  microsomal activity and mRNA level for 
CϒP1A2  were not induced  while those for CϒP3A4  were slightly inducedBecause of the words, “not induced” and “slightly induced,” (YM758, 
CYP1A2) and (YM758, CYP1A2) are NDEIs
19960413 From these results, DPT  was characterized to be a competitive inhibitor  of CϒP2C9  and CϒP3A4,  with 
K(i) values of 3.5 and 10.8 μM  in HLM and 24.9 and 3.5 μM in baculovirus–insect cell-expressed human 
CYPs, respectivelyBecause Kwzs  larger than 10 μM, (DPT, CYP2C9) and (DPT, CYP3A4) are 
ADEIs
Methods Mol Biol . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 November 07.Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author ManuscriptWu et al. Page 28
Table 3
Annotation performance evaluation
Key terms Annotation categories Frequencies Krippendorff's alpha
Drug 8,633 0.953
CYP 3,801
PK parameter 1,508
Number 3,042
Mechanism 2,732
Change 1,828
Total words 97,291
DDI sentences CDDI sentences 1,191 0.921
VDDI sentences 120
Total sentences 4,724
DDI pairs DDI 1,239 0.905
ADDI 300
NDDI 294
DEI 565
ADEI 95
NDEI 181
Total drug pairs 12,399
Methods Mol Biol . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 November 07.Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author ManuscriptWu et al. Page 29
Table 4
DDI data description
Datasets Abstracts Sentences DDI pairs True DDI pairs
In vivo DDI training 174 2,112 2,024 359
In vivo DDI testing 44 545 574 45
In vitro DDI training 168 1,894 7,122 783
In vitro DDI testing 42 475 1,542 146
Methods Mol Biol . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 November 07.Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author ManuscriptWu et al. Page 30
Table 5
DDI extraction performance
Datasets Precision Recall F-measure
In vivo DDI training 0.67 0.78 0.72
In vivo DDI testing 0.67 0.79 0.73
In vitro DDI training 0.51 0.59 0.55
In vitro DDI testing 0.47 0.58 0.52
Methods Mol Biol . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 November 07.Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author ManuscriptWu et al. Page 31Table 6
DDI extraction error analysis from testing DDI sets
No. Error categories Error typeFrequency
Examples In vivo In vitro
1 There are multiple drugs and PK parameters in 
the sentence, and the sentence is longFP 6 34 PMID: 12426514: In three subjects with measurable concentrations in the single-dose study, rifampin 
significantly decreased the mean maximum plasma concentration (C(max)) and area under the plasma 
concentration-time curve from 0 to 24 h (AUC(0–24)) of praziquantel by 81%( p<0.05) and 85 % 
(p<0.01), respectively, whereas rifampin significantly decreased the mean C(max) and AUC(0–24) of 
praziquantel by 74 % ( p<0.05) and 80%( p<0.01), respectively, in five subjects with measurable 
concentrations in the multiple-dose study
FN 2 17 PMID: 10608481: Erythromycin and ketoconazole showed a clear inhibitory effect on the 3-
hydroxylation of lidocaine at 5 μM of lidocaine (IC 50 9.9 μM and 13.9 μM, respectively) but did not 
show a consistent effect at 800 μM of lidocaine (IC 50 > 250 μM and 75.0 μM, respectively)
2 There is no direct DDI relationship between two 
drugs, but the presence of some words, such as 
dose and increase, may lead to a false-positive 
predictionFP 6 14 PMID: 17192504: A significant fraction of patients to be treated with HMR1766 is expected to be 
maintained on warfarin
3 DDI is presented in an indirect way FN 2 19 PMID: 11994058: In CYP2D6 poor metabolizers, systemic exposure was greater after chlorpheniramine 
alone than in extensive metabolizers, and administration of quinidine resulted in a slight increase in 
CLoral
4 Design issue: Some NDDIs are inferred due to 
some adjectives (little, minor, negligible)FP 1 3 PMID: 10223772: In contrast, the effect of ranitidine or ebrotidine on CYP3A activity in vivo seems to 
have little clinical significance
5 Unknown FP 5 44 PMID: 10383922: CYP1A2, CYP2A6, and CYP2E1 activities were not significantly inhibited by 
azelastine and the two metabolites
FN 6 26 PMID: 10681383: However, the most unusual result was the interaction between testosterone and 
nifedipine
Methods Mol Biol . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 November 07.