Pediatric Drug-Drug Interaction Evaluation: Drug, Patient 
Population, and Methodological Considerations
Daniel Gonzalez, PharmD, PhD1, Jaydeep Sinha, PhD1
1Division of Pharmacotherapy and Experimental Therapeutics, UNC Eshelman School of 
Pharmacy, The University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, USA
Abstract
Hospitalized pediatric patients and those with complex or chronic conditions treated on an 
outpatient basis are commonly prescribed multiple drugs resulting in an increased risk for drug­
drug interactions (DDIs). Although dedicated DDI evaluations are routinely performed in healthy 
adult volunteers during drug development, they are rarely performed in pediatric patients due to 
ethical, logistical, and methodological challenges. In the absence of pediatric DDI evaluations, 
adult DDI data are often extrapolated to pediatric patients. However, the magnitude of a DDI 
in pediatric patients may differ from adults because of age-dependent physiological changes 
that can impact drug disposition or response, and due to other factors related to the drug (e.g., 
dose, formulation) and the patient population (e.g., disease states, obesity). Therefore, the DDI 
magnitude needs to be assessed in children separately from adults, although a lack of clinical 
DDI data in pediatric populations makes this evaluation challenging. As a result, pediatric DDI 
assessment relies on the predictive performance of the pharmacometric approaches used, such as 
population and physiologically-based pharmacokinetic modeling. Therefore, careful consideration 
needs to be given to adequately account for the age-dependent physiological changes in these 
models to build a high confidence level for such untested DDI scenarios. This review article 
summarizes the key considerations related to the drug, patient population, and methodology, and 
how they can impact DDI evaluation in the pediatric population.
Keywords
pediatrics; drug-drug interactions; pharmacokinetics; pharmacodynamics
Potential Drug-Drug Interactions (DDIs) in Pediatric Patients
Drug-drug interactions (DDI) are a serious concern in pharmacotherapy whereby the 
pharmacological effect of a victim drug is either exaggerated or suppressed by the 
concomitant administration of a perpetrator drug. Depending upon the extent of DDI, 
the altered pharmacology may manifest as adverse effects, including both on- and off­
Corresponding author:  Daniel Gonzalez, UNC Eshelman School of Pharmacy, The University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, 
Campus Box #7569, Chapel Hill, NC 27599-7569, USA. Tel: +1-919-966-9984; Fax: +1-919-962-0644; daniel.gonzalez@unc.edu.
Declaration of Conflicts of Interest
The authors declare no relevant conflicts of interest.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
J Clin Pharmacol . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 June 01.
Published in final edited form as:
J Clin Pharmacol . 2021 June ; 61(Suppl 1): S175–S187. doi:10.1002/jcph.1881.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscripttarget effects. Alternatively, suppression of a drug’s pharmacological effect may lead 
to treatment failure. In some instances, a DDI can have a therapeutic benefit and has 
been deliberately accounted for in the recommended dosing regimen. The majority of the 
known therapeutically beneficial DDIs occur by pharmacodynamic (PD) interactions, such 
as synergistic effects of various combined antibiotic regimens and combined anesthetic­
analgesic regimens in general anesthesia.1,2 However, desired pharmacokinetic (PK) 
interactions can also be exploited to optimize a therapeutic regimen, such as ritonavir­
boosted dosage of protease inhibitors in patients with human immunodeficiency virus 
(HIV).3 Irrespective of the nature of a DDI (i.e., whether beneficial or detrimental), it is 
important to evaluate the DDI’s magnitude in the target population where the interacting 
drugs are likely to be co-administered. Although DDI evaluations are routinely performed 
in healthy adult volunteers during drug development, limited studies have evaluated DDIs 
in pediatric patients due to ethical, logistical, and methodological challenges.4 As a result, 
there are limited DDI data for most drugs used in pediatric patients, including the extent 
to which DDI magnitude varies with age. In the absence of DDI data that can inform 
dosing adjustments in pediatric patients, adult DDI data are extrapolated to pediatric patients 
without accounting for age-dependent physiological changes that can alter PK and PD.
Hospitalized pediatric patients often receive multiple drugs, resulting in a potential increased 
DDI risk. One retrospective cohort study evaluated the prevalence and characteristics of 
potential DDIs in hospitalized pediatric patients (<21 years of age) using the Pediatric 
Health Information System (PHIS) database, which included data from 43 freestanding 
children’s hospitals.5 The authors found that out of 498,956 hospitalizations in 2011, 
49% were associated with ≥1 potential DDI. Also, they identified that in 41% of these 
hospitalizations, pediatric patients were exposed to a “major” potential DDI (defined as a 
DDI that is life-threatening or requires medical intervention to treat or prevent an adverse 
drug event). For infants, on day 1 of hospitalization, 21.8% were exposed to a potential 
DDI, increasing to 32% by day 30 of hospitalization. For pediatric patients >1 year of age, 
34.7% and 66.3% were exposed to a potential DDI on day 1 and day 30 of hospitalization, 
respectively. Interestingly, the authors noted that half of the exposures were related to 
potential DDIs that were caused by less common drug pairs (≤3% of pediatric patients 
exposed per hospital day).
Another study that evaluated potential DDIs in pediatric intensive care unit (PICU) patients 
using the PHIS database found that, on average, patients were exposed to 10 distinct 
drugs during hospitalization and 20 drugs cumulatively during a hospitalization.6 Out of 
54,549 PICU patients <18 years of age, 75% were exposed to ≥1 potential DDI, and 69% 
were exposed to ≥1 “major” potential DDI. Potential DDIs were associated with specific 
diagnoses (neoplasms, circulatory systems, congenital anomalies, nervous system diseases), 
the presence of complex chronic conditions, increasing number of distinct drugs used, 
increasing PICU length of stay, and white race.6
Across both studies, several drug classes commonly involved in the potential DDIs 
were similar: opioids (25–29.7% of all potential DDIs), neurologic drugs (15–23.6%), 
anti-infective drugs (17–18.1%), renal diuretics (18.8%), and gastrointestinal drugs (10.5–
13%).5,6 In the study of PICU patients, additional drug classes noted included renal diuretics Gonzalez and Sinha Page 2
J Clin Pharmacol . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 June 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript(18.8%), analgesics and antipyretics (13.1%), psychotherapeutics (11.7%), and blood and 
coagulation drugs (10.4%).6 Among the “major” potential DDIs, the top three drug pairs in 
both studies included fentanyl plus morphine, fentanyl plus midazolam, and midazolam plus 
morphine.5,6 These DDIs can result in a potentially additive respiratory depressing effect.
Pediatric patients with complex or chronic conditions treated on an outpatient basis may also 
be at risk for potential DDIs.7–10 Due to less monitoring by a health care professional, 
outpatients may be more susceptible to the adverse effects of DDIs. For example, a 
retrospective cohort study of Medicaid patients <18 years of age in Colorado reported 
that 35% of 242,230 patients received ≥2 concurrent drugs for at least one day.7 The 
pediatric patients that received a greater number of concurrent drugs were at greater 
risk for potential DDIs and were exposed to less commonly prescribed drug classes 
(psychotropics, anticonvulsants, and opioids). Therefore, potential DDIs are common in 
hospitalized pediatric patients and patients with complex or chronic conditions treated on an 
outpatient basis. Additional studies are warranted to inform the DDI risk extent and guide 
therapeutic management when interacting drugs are co-administered.
Challenges with DDI Evaluation in the Pediatric Population
There are numerous ethical, logistical, and methodological challenges in evaluating DDI 
potential in pediatric patients, summarized in Table 1 and compared with adult DDI 
evaluation considerations. According to 21 CFR 50, subpart D, which describes clinical 
investigations in pediatric subjects associated with a more than minimal risk, there must be 
an anticipated benefit for children enrolled in clinical studies.4,11 Therefore, DDI studies 
need to be performed in pediatric patients receiving the drug as part of their care.4
The analysis of DDI data from pediatric patients receiving the drugs per standard of care can 
present methodological challenges. Unlike DDI studies in healthy adult volunteers, analysis 
of DDI data from pediatric patients requires separating the effect of the DDI of interest 
from the confounding effects of disease states and other concomitant medications. Also, due 
to limitations around the collection of numerous PK samples (particularly in neonates and 
infants) and low informed consent rates, ensuring an adequate sample size across pediatric 
age groups to evaluate the DDI effect can be challenging.
A comprehensive literature review that searched articles published between 1945–2011 
identified 145 reports of DDIs in pediatric patients ranging in age from birth to 20 years.12 
Seventy-four (49%) studies used a prospective design, 16 (11%) were retrospective, and 60 
(40%) were case reports. The number of reports that provided information for neonates, 
infants, children, and adolescents was 9, 38, 120, and 52, respectively. Therefore, although 
neonates and infants are expected to have the most considerable differences in DDI potential 
relative to adults, limited DDI data exist for these pediatric age groups.12
Potential Differences in DDI Magnitude Between Pediatric Patients Relative to Adults
The magnitude of a DDI in pediatric patients may differ from adults due to age-dependent 
physiological processes that potentially impact a drug’s PK and PD. Depending upon 
the physiological processes involved in the drugs’ disposition and the patient population 
characteristics, the magnitude of DDI can widely vary between children and adults. By Gonzalez and Sinha Page 3
J Clin Pharmacol . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 June 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscriptcomparing drug clearance (CL), area under the concentration vs. time curve (AUC), or 
steady-state concentrations, a published meta-analysis compared adult and pediatric DDI 
magnitude.12 For 24 drug pairs (data from 31 pediatric and 33 adult DDI studies), the 
authors reported that the DDI magnitude was higher, similar, or lower for 10, 15, and 8 
of the cases, respectively.12 Therefore, based on potential differences in DDI magnitude 
relative to adults, DDI evaluation in pediatric patients requires careful consideration of drug, 
patient population, and methodological considerations, which we have discussed below and 
summarized in Figure 1.
Drug-Related Considerations
Concomitant use of drugs can result in either PK- or PD-mediated DDIs. In either case, it 
is essential to understand how drug-related properties affect the PK/PD and DDI magnitude 
in pediatric patients. Elucidating the relationship between a drug’s properties and expected 
age-dependent differences in PK/PD could inform potential extrapolation of the magnitude 
of a DDI from adults to children. Such considerations should be made judiciously depending 
upon the type of DDI and the drugs’ intended use. A previously published review article 
by Salem et al. performed a comprehensive literature search through 2011, and summarized 
pediatric DDIs reported in the literature.12
PK-Mediated DDIs— The mechanism of DDIs often involves a perpetrator drug that 
affects the PK of a victim drug by altering its absorption, distribution, metabolism, or 
excretion (ADME) in vivo . Elimination-mediated DDIs (eDDI) have received significant 
attention in drug development as these DDIs can directly influence CL.13–16 Although 
eDDIs have been characterized to the greatest extent among all DDIs that alter ADME 
processes, limited data are available for eDDIs in children. Therefore, eDDI assessment 
in children often relies on adult data12, and the objective is to understand whether the 
magnitude of the DDI observed in adults is similar and clinically relevant in pediatric 
patients.
The clinical relevance of an eDDI would primarily depend on two factors: (1) the extent of 
the eDDI (i.e., the fold-change in CL) and the (2) therapeutic window of the drug for a given 
indication. The narrower the therapeutic window, the more likely a fold-change in CL will 
warrant a dose adjustment. For instance, phenytoin (a first-generation anti-epileptic drug) 
is much more susceptible to eDDIs than oxcarbazepine (a second-generation anti-epileptic 
drug) because of its narrow therapeutic window.17,18 Altered phenytoin exposure can result 
in neurological adverse events or recurrent seizures (i.e., treatment failure). The therapeutic 
window is related to a drug’s PD properties, which might vary in children due to maturation 
and/or sensitivity of the pharmacological target(s). Therefore, information about the victim 
drug’s therapeutic window in pediatric patients can help assess the clinical relevance of a 
DDI. Often the therapeutic window is assumed to be similar to adults in the absence of 
data to refute this assumption. In this scenario, the eDDI magnitude in children dictates the 
clinical relevance of a DDI.
In the absence of clinical data, quantitative approaches are helpful to predict the eDDI 
magnitude in the target pediatric population. In the case of reversible metabolic inhibition, Gonzalez and Sinha Page 4
J Clin Pharmacol . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 June 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscriptthe eDDI magnitude as determined by a fold increase in CL (RCL) is driven by two factors: 
fraction of dose of the victim drug eliminated by the perpetrated enzyme ( fe,dose), and the 
in vivo  concentration of the perpetrator drug ( I), as approximated by a “static” model in 
Equation 1.19–21 The model ignores the time-dependent variation in the perpetrator drug’s 
concentration, thereby assuming it “static” at the site of elimination. A “static” concentration 
(I) is analogous to the concept of an “average” steady-state concentration (while the actual 
steady-state concentration fluctuates with time), which is the measure of exposure often 
used for DDI evaluations. When an equivalent exposure ( I) of the perpetrator drug is 
targeted in children assuming a similar exposure-response relationship between children 
and adults, RCL will differ in children if fe,dose differs relative to adults. Even in the 
case of non-equivalent exposure ( I) in children, at least for the “strong” inhibitors, RCL is 
rate-limited by fe,dose, since in this case, Equation 1 is approximated by Equation 2 due to a 
high I
Ki ratio. Here, Ki represents the reversible inhibition constant.
RCL=1
fe,dose
1 +I
Ki+ (1 − fe,dose) (1)
When I >> Ki (for strong inhibitors),
RCL=1
(1 −fe,dose)(2)
Since, 1 +I
Ki≈ ∞
Under such circumstances, extrapolation of an eDDI would be simplified to extrapolation of 
fe,dose from adults to children. Therefore, to evaluate a pediatric eDDI by leveraging adult 
data, it is of utmost importance to understand age-related variation in fe,dose.
Theoretically, fe,dose can vary early in life due to multiple factors, including the ontogeny 
of metabolic pathways and renal function maturation. Ontogenic maturation of different 
drug-metabolizing enzymes does not occur at the same rate. For instance, the fractional 
expression (relative to adults) of CYP2C9 is 0.17 at birth, whereas it is negligible for 
CYP1A2; however, the latter matures faster than the former.22 Because of the differential 
maturation, the fe,dose of the respective enzymes (for a shared substrate) would drastically 
change from birth to adulthood. As quantified by Salem et al.22, if the drug-metabolizing 
enzymes CYP2C9 and CYP1A2 exclusively metabolize a hypothetical drug A, with the 
majority of the dose being eliminated by CYP1A2 in adults ( fe,dose> 0.90 , then the 
contribution of these two enzymes will be almost equal at birth (i.e., fe,dose would be 
approximately 0.50 for both isoforms). These authors further estimated that inhibition of the 
CYP2C9 pathway would have a limited impact on the AUC of drug A (~5% increase) in 
adults, whereas, in neonates, it would cause a 2.1-fold increase in the AUC due to a higher Gonzalez and Sinha Page 5
J Clin Pharmacol . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 June 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscriptfe,dose for CYP2C9 in neonates. On the contrary, for a different hypothetical drug B that 
is equally metabolized by CYP3A4 and CYP2D6 at birth (i.e., fe,dose= 0.50 ), the AUC 
ratio would increase from 1.9-fold at birth to 4.7-fold in adults, if the CYP3A4 pathway 
is inhibited by a perpetrator. This suggests that the clinical relevance (or irrelevance) of an 
eDDI in children depends on the victim drug’s metabolic pathways and the child’s age. 
Drugs that are metabolized by CYP3A4 may also be substrates for CYP3A7 in neonates and 
young infants. The switch from CYP3A7 to CYP3A4 has been reported to occur in the first 
3 months of life, which can impact CL predictions.23
If renal excretion also plays a role in the overall elimination of drug A in the above example, 
the fe,dose for the CYP2C9 pathway may further increase in neonates and infants (relative 
to adults) due to immature renal function. Therefore, careful consideration is required when 
extrapolating an eDDI for a partially renally cleared drug because the eDDI magnitude can 
be higher in neonates and infants relative to what is expected based on sole consideration 
of drug-metabolizing enzyme ontogeny. One study applied a sigmoidal hyperbolic model 
to characterize the relationship between post-menstrual age and glomerular filtration rate.24 
The authors reported that the time to half the adult value of glomerular filtration rate 
occurred at 47.7 weeks of post-menstrual age, suggesting that maturation in renal function 
will be an important predictor of clearance in neonates and infants.24 Another study 
developed an ontogeny function based on postnatal age, gestational age at birth, and 
body weight, and identified birth as an important determinant of glomerular filtration 
rate for pediatric patients less than 105 weeks post-menstrual age.25 Another important 
consideration is that body size-related developmental changes in organ size, composition, 
and perfusion occur disproportionately with age. As a result, the effect of age on the 
three variables that alter hepatic CL (i.e., hepatic intrinsic clearance CLint,H], free fraction 
in blood fu,b], and hepatic blood flow QH]) are not proportional to each other, which 
could affect the extraction ratio ( EH) of the victim drug in different age groups. Using 
the Simcyp Simulator, one analysis demonstrated that such age-dependent physiological 
changes decrease the EH of midazolam from 0.6 in adults to 0.02 at birth.26 Therefore, in 
the case of midazolam, it would be classified as an intermediate extraction drug in adults 
and a low extraction in neonates. Furthermore, a switch from a higher extraction ratio to a 
lower extraction ratio may increase the risk of a DDI in neonates and infants. This occurs 
because as the EH of a drug decreases, the CL becomes gradually less dependent on QH
and more sensitive to changes in CLint,H. In addition, a potential shift in the contribution 
of metabolic pathways early in life (e.g., a switch from CYP3A4 to CYP3A7 pathway in 
neonates23) and its probable implication on fe,dose should also be considered during DDI 
extrapolation. Similar mechanistic considerations need to be evaluated for other modes of 
eDDI in children, such as transporter-mediated DDIs.
There are fewer examples focused on characterizing absorption-related DDIs in the pediatric 
population, typically pertinent to poorly soluble drugs. For instance, it has been reported that 
concomitant administration of proton pump inhibitors (PPIs) decreases the bioavailability 
of posaconazole suspension (a poorly soluble systemic anti-fungal drug) by 42% in 
immunocompromised children, imposing a risk of invasive fungal infection.27 It has been Gonzalez and Sinha Page 6
J Clin Pharmacol . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 June 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscripthypothesized that the reduced bioavailability is due to the elevation of gastric pH by PPIs, 
which affects the pH-dependent solubility of posaconazole. A similar interaction with 
PPIs has been reported in adults for other drugs, such as atazanavir (an HIV protease 
inhibitor) and mycophenolate mofetil (an immunosuppressant) that often requires dosage 
adjustment.28 Therefore, the effect of pH modulating agents on the bioavailability of such 
vulnerable drugs (with demonstrated pH-dependent solubility) warrants further investigation 
in the pediatric population as well. This would be particularly important because neonates, 
infants, and children (especially birth to 3 years of age) are reported to possess overall 
higher baseline gastric pH than adults based on repeated measurements taken over a 
24-hour period.29 It is not clear how this physiological variation would impact absorption­
related DDIs in these pediatric age groups. There is evidence in adults that modulation of 
intestinal P-glycoprotein (P-gp) can alter the extent of absorption of P-gp substrates.30–33 
For example, decreased digoxin (a P-gp substrate) exposure following concomitant oral 
administration with rifampin (a P-gp inducer) was linked to intestinal P-gp induction.33 
In addition to absorption and elimination processes, there is evidence that transporter 
modulation may also alter drug distribution. For example, ketoconazole was found to 
increase the distribution of the protease inhibitors ritonavir and saquinavir through P-gp 
modulation in the blood brain barrier.34 Since the drug transporters are subject to age-related 
maturation, such transporter-mediated DDIs during oral absorption may manifest to different 
extents in children than adults, which warrants further investigation.
PD-Mediated DDIs— PD-mediated DDIs occur at the site of action (i.e., at the 
receptor level), such that the perpetrator drug directly potentiates or attenuates the victim 
drug’s effect without altering its exposure. While PK-mediated interactions are mostly 
considered undesired (with a few exceptions, such as ritonavir-boosted regimens of protease 
inhibitors3), PD-mediated DDIs serve as the basis of many therapeutic strategies, such as 
in anesthetic practice.35 For example, general anesthetics, and opioid analgesics are often 
combined in routine anesthesia (i.e., synergistic); naloxone is used to reverse the effect of 
opioids (i.e., antagonistic); and combination regimens of antibiotics are frequently used to 
achieve a synergistic effect on bacterial killing.1,2
Since PD-mediated interactions occur at the receptor level, any possible alteration to 
receptor abundance in the pediatric population might have implications in exposure­
response, and consequently, in DDI assessment. According to Stephenson’s modified 
receptor occupancy theory36–38, the significant portion of the receptor abundance is 
constituted by the “spare receptor” pool (or receptor reserve), which explains why the drug 
concentrations required for 50% receptor occupancy ( Kd) and for 50% of the maximal effect 
(EC50) are not necessarily the same. In other words, the theory explains why 100% receptor 
occupancy is not required for the potent agonists to elicit the maximal effect; and the higher 
the potency, the lower would be the EC50 compared to Kd. This implies that as the receptor 
reserve becomes more diminished, the EC50 will progressively increase and approach the 
Kd due to a rightward shift in the exposure-response curve (i.e., lowering the potency).37 
Nonetheless, if a gradual maturation of the pharmacological targets during early human 
life is assumed, a similar scenario of a low “receptor reserve”36 might exist, which could Gonzalez and Sinha Page 7
J Clin Pharmacol . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 June 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscriptcause variation in the exposure-response profile in children depending on age. However, no 
previous systematic studies sought to test this hypothesis in the DDI context to the authors’ 
knowledge.
There is some direct and indirect evidence from both preclinical and clinical studies 
that pharmacological targets, such as the serotonin reuptake transporter (SERT) on the 
presynaptic neurons and gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) receptors on the post-synaptic 
neurons, are expressed and/or function differently in children.39,40 However, data describing 
the age-dependency of pharmacological targets is generally lacking.40 Furthermore, the 
pharmacological targets are unknown for many central nervous system (CNS)-acting drugs. 
Therefore, the mechanistic underpinnings that may drive the differences in PD-mediated 
DDIs in children are not well understood. PD-mediated DDIs are usually assumed to be 
similar to adults in the absence of studies in the pediatric population. Studies are needed 
to characterize age-dependent changes in PD-mediated DDIs, including characterizing the 
ontogeny of PD targets, changes in PD endpoints in the presence of a DDI, and potential 
dosage adjustments that may be needed when drugs are expected to lead to a clinically 
significant DDI.
Patient Population Considerations
When performing a DDI evaluation in pediatric patients, patient-related factors can affect 
the DDI magnitude and variability. These factors include the pediatric age groups that the 
drug will likely be used in; the anticipated concomitantly administered drugs that could 
result in potential DDIs; differences in drug dosing and the resulting exposure of the 
perpetrator or victim drug based on factors such as age, body weight, the formulation used, 
or the indication; and the potential impact of genetics, obesity, life-saving interventions such 
as extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO), and disease-mediated changes on drug 
disposition and response. If the dose-exposure or exposure-response relationship(s) for the 
victim or perpetrator drug varies with age, this can result in potential age-dependent changes 
in the DDI magnitude. For an investigational drug, if these factors are considered early in 
the pediatric drug development program, they can inform the data analysis approach and 
collection of clinical data that can aid in assessing DDIs in the pediatric population.
Apart from age, the impact of pediatric formulation on the DDI magnitude should also be 
investigated, particularly for those poorly soluble drugs whose bioavailability is impacted 
by formulation, altering the dose-exposure profile. For example, the triazole anti-fungal 
drug posaconazole can be administered as suspension and delayed-release tablets depending 
on a patient’s age. The suspension formulation has a lower bioavailability than the 
delayed-release tablets.27 Posaconazole, a strong CYP3A inhibitor41, can be prescribed 
to combat invasive fungal disease in immunocompromised patients also receiving the 
CYP3A substrate tacrolimus, resulting in a metabolic DDI. Although this DDI’s relevance 
is well characterized in adults (i.e., a 3-fold dose reduction of tacrolimus is warranted)41,42, 
investigation in pediatric patients is warranted. This is particularly important because a 
recent population PK (PopPK) study in infants and children has identified that posaconazole 
had a poor and saturable bioavailability when administered as the suspension formulation 
in children.27 Interestingly, this study also concluded that a significant portion (>50%) Gonzalez and Sinha Page 8
J Clin Pharmacol . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 June 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscriptof virtual pediatric patients would fail to attain the target therapeutic exposure (trough 
concentration >1 mg/L for treatment of invasive fungal disease) with any feasible dose of 
posaconazole suspension if diarrhea is present and a gastric acid suppressant (i.e., PPI) is 
used concomitantly. Therefore, because of the expected lower exposure of posaconazole, 
the DDI’s magnitude may differ in pediatric patients, potentially requiring a different dose 
adjustment, which needs to be investigated.
Other patient-related variables that can alter the fe,dose can also affect the magnitude of a 
DDI. For example, given that DDI data is generally collected from patients receiving drug 
treatments as part of their care, it is important to consider whether disease-mediated changes 
and life-saving interventions such as ECMO can play a role. Disease states can alter organ 
function, and in the case of ECMO, adsorption of the drug to the circuit can sequester the 
drug and alter its PK.43 Additional patient variables such as obesity and genetic variation 
(e.g., genetic differences in genes encoding drug-metabolizing enzymes) could alter fe,dose
and the DDI magnitude.
Clearance of hepatically eliminated drugs can be affected by obesity-induced nonalcoholic 
fatty liver disease (NAFLD). NAFLD is a range of progressive hepatic pathologies, starting 
with abnormal hepatocellular fatty infiltration (known as steatosis  where liver fat is >5% 
of the total liver). It can progress to steatohepatitis  (a fibro-inflammatory condition known 
as nonalcoholic steatohepatitis [NASH]). If not addressed, the inflammatory state can even 
lead to liver cirrhosis, where the loss of hepatocellular mass and function occurs. Although 
NAFLD’s effect on drug-metabolizing enzymes has been investigated in animal studies, 
limited information is available for humans, where findings remain mostly inconclusive.44 
Nonetheless, based on available data, the effect of obesity on drug-metabolizing enzymes 
appears to be isoform-specific, with CYP3A4 decreasing and CYP2E1 increasing with 
obesity.45 An isoform-specific effect of obesity on drug-metabolizing enzymes would 
impose a risk of altering the fe,dose of the purturbed enzyme (and hence the DDI magnitude) 
if that isoform is preferentially modulated (i.e., up- or down-regulated) by obesity. However, 
DDI evaluation in pediatric patients with obesity is currently lacking. In adults, one 
study found that co-administration of the CYP3A substrate, lurasidone, with the inhibitor, 
posaconazole, resulted in a less pronounced interaction (a lower increased geometric ratio 
for the total AUC) in patients with obesity as compared with normal-weight volunteers 
(although the inhibitory effect lasted longer).46 While it has been established that >90% 
of obese adults have some degree of NAFLD44,47, the prevalence of NAFLD in children 
with obesity is generally believed to be low.48 However, a recent retrospective study (based 
on autopsy reports conducted between 1993 to 2003 in the county of San Diego) has 
estimated that NAFLD’s prevalence in children and adolescents with obesity is 38%.49 An 
association between NAFLD and pediatric obesity has been reported for other countries as 
well.50,51 Therefore, the influence of obesity on DDI magnitude in children and adolescents 
with obesity is an immediate area of research with high importance, especially amidst the 
increasing rate of obesity in the pediatric population.52
There may also be differences in the concomitantly administered drugs and the victim 
and perpetrator drug dosing and indication across pediatric age groups. These differences Gonzalez and Sinha Page 9
J Clin Pharmacol . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 June 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscriptmay impact the specific perpetrator drugs that should be considered when making DDI 
predictions and whether there are likely to be differences in victim or perpetrator drug 
exposure with age, leading to differences in the DDI magnitude. Therefore, patient-related 
variables that can affect the victim or perpetrator drug exposure or alter the fe,dose should be 
considered when evaluating DDI magnitude in pediatric patients.
Methodological Considerations
Non-Compartmental Analysis— In adults, DDI studies designed to evaluate a potential 
PK-mediated DDI often involve studying healthy volunteers using a crossover clinical 
trial design and an intensive PK sampling scheme. In analyzing this PK data, a non­
compartmental analysis (NCA) approach is applied to compute a measure of drug exposure 
(i.e., AUC, maximal drug concentration) from individual concentration vs. time data. 
However, NCA analyses are not commonly used in pediatric DDI evaluation because of the 
sparse sampling scheme, especially in neonates and infants. Also, there is often variability 
in the number of samples and sample collection timing between subjects. Applying a “naïve­
pooled approach,” where all samples are assumed to come from a single patient (ignoring 
the inter-individual variability), is challenging to implement in pediatric DDI studies. This 
approach is generally not feasible because the AUC change in pediatric patients may not 
reflect the actual magnitude of DDI due to possible confounding effect(s) at the individual 
level. These confounding effects arise because of the heterogeneity in the pediatric patients 
studied (unlike healthy adults) and their existing standard of care therapies. Therefore, 
opportunities to apply traditional NCA in pediatric DDI assessment is limited.
Population Modeling— PopPK modeling can be used to characterize the disposition of a 
drug and account for the effect of patient covariates (e.g., body weight, age, and concomitant 
medications) that help to explain inter-individual variability. Using PopPK modeling, the 
impact of a specific covariate (e.g., interacting drug) on a PK parameter such as CL can 
be separated from other confounding covariates such as organ dysfunction measures. When 
applying PopPK modeling for DDI evaluation, selecting an appropriate parameterization 
for the covariate effect is of utmost importance. The choice should be made based on 
prior knowledge about the interacting drugs’ characteristics, especially when a high inter­
individual variability in the magnitude of DDI is expected in the target population. The 
covariate effect parameterization should also be based on study design considerations and 
the available covariate data (e.g., doses studied, sample size).
Modeling Concomitant Drug Use as a Categorical Covariate— In PopPK models, 
the effect of a DDI can be incorporated as a categorical covariate. This is accomplished 
by introducing a binary variable that accounts for the co-administration of the perpetrator 
drug.53,54 This approach implicitly assumes that the change in CL (due to co-administration 
of an interacting drug) is a fixed value, which does not vary with respect to dose, age, and 
disease, or any other variable that potentially influences fe,dose. However, this assumption 
may not be valid for all drugs because the dose and/or patient-related factors can also 
influence the magnitude of DDI depending upon the drug’s disposition characteristics.Gonzalez and Sinha Page 10
J Clin Pharmacol . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 June 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author ManuscriptThe dose of the perpetrator drug can influence the magnitude of the DDI depending on 
both its potency of enzyme modulation and its therapeutic dose range (that determines 
[I]). More specifically, the ratio of IKi should be considered. According to Equation 
1, a low and a high IKi ratio would imply a weak and a strong inhibitor, respectively. 
Theoretically, for a weak inhibitor with a wide therapeutic dose range, the magnitude of a 
DDI may be dose-dependent due to incomplete inhibition at the lower doses. In contrast, 
less dose-dependency would be expected for a DDI that results from a strong inhibitor 
since complete inhibition would be achieved at a lower dose. For example, when the strong 
CYP3A inhibitor itraconazole is co-administered (100 mg once daily vs. 200 mg once 
daily for multiple days) with midazolam, midazolam’s AUC increased to a similar extent 
(~6-fold) in both the dose groups.55 However, in reality, the well-recognized categorization 
of “weak” and “strong” inhibitors may not align with low and high IKi ratios given that 
the ratio will depend on the clinical range of concentrations and the inhibition constant. For 
example, the effect of itraconazole dose on midazolam AUC was more pronounced when 
a 50 mg single dose (~ 2-fold AUC ratio) is compared with 100 or 200 mg once daily 
(~6-fold AUC ratio).55 In addition to the dose, the dosing regimen could also alter the DDI 
magnitude depending upon the perpetrator’s half-life. The same study reported that a 400 
mg single dose of itraconazole increased midazolam’s AUC to a similar extent as 100 mg 
once daily. Therefore, when evaluating the magnitude of a DDI, one should consider the 
resulting exposures for varying dosing regimens.
As discussed, the magnitude of a DDI can vary due to differences in several other patient­
related factors, which potentially alter the fe,dose. For example, the fe,dose of a partially 
metabolically cleared victim drug can increase in neonates and infants due to the immature 
renal function. Even once the renal function is mature, organ dysfunction can also cause 
fe,dose to increase further. Apart from this, differential ontogeny rates across various enzyme 
isoforms (e.g., CYP3A4 vs. CYP2D6) would cause their relative expression to vary with 
age, resulting in variation in fe,dose. When multiple metabolic pathways are involved (e.g., 
CYP3A4 vs. CYP2D6), the presence of a polymorphic allele in at least one of these 
contributing pathways (e.g., CYP2D6) would further increase fe,dose of the other pathway 
(i.e., CYP3A4), which contribute to variability in the DDI magnitude. In these situations, 
modeling the DDI using a more mechanistic framework may be warranted.
Mechanism-Based Modeling— Another strategy to model the DDI and account for the 
dose-effect is to co-model the perpetrator drug’s PK. The perpetrator drug model is then 
linked to the victim drug’s elimination via a fit-for-purpose enzyme modulation model.56,57 
While this approach closely aligns with the pharmacology (since the perpetrator’s exposure 
is considered a continuous covariate in the model), its implementation is often challenging 
due to the lack of perpetrator concentration vs. time data, especially in children. Therefore, 
another approach is to capture the dose-dependent DDI effect by modeling it as an ordinal 
categorical covariate, accounting for each dose.54 While the latter approach can be more 
readily implemented because perpetrator drug concentration vs. time data are not needed, it 
also reduces the power to estimate the ordinal covariate effects by sub-grouping the patients 
based on the dose level. Therefore, whenever data are available from multiple dose levels, Gonzalez and Sinha Page 11
J Clin Pharmacol . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 June 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscriptefforts should be made to account for dosing differences as a continuous covariate. Although 
this approach would account for dosing differences, a fundamental assumption is that there 
is no inter-individual variability in the average perpetrator drug exposure (equivalent [ I] in 
Equation 1) within a dose group. Therefore, the inter-individual variability in the perpetrator 
drug PK is not captured. For example, a sigmoidal model where the DDI effect increases 
with the perpetrator drug’s dose level and eventually asymptotes to a maximal effect can be 
applied.
In addition to the perpetrator drug dose, other continuous covariates (e.g., age, organ 
function) that potentially impact the DDI by causing variation in fe,dose between pediatric 
patients should also be considered. The model parameterization should be justified by the 
biological considerations that can contribute to drug exposure variability and take into 
account study design variables such as the sample size.
Early phase pediatric studies may be limited in sample size in many cases, making DDI 
estimation by a PopPK analysis challenging. A simulation-estimation-based exercise by 
Yang and Beerahee concluded that PopPK studies’ power to detect the DDI would largely 
depend on the inter-individual variability in PK parameters.58 Using a two-compartment 
model, their results indicated that for a parameter with low inter-individual variability 
(<25% coefficient of variation), a minimum of 40 participants would be required to achieve 
90% power. The requirement will increase to at least 80 participants if the inter-individual 
variability on the PK parameter rises to nearly 40%. A similar trend of a higher sample size 
requirement for PopPK studies was reported in another simulation-estimation-based study 
compared to an NCA approach to achieve the required power.59 Their overall conclusion 
was that typical phase 2/3 studies in drug development would allow DDI estimation by 
PopPK methods. Therefore, given the sample size constraints in pediatric studies, it is 
recommended to perform simulation-based power analysis on a case-by-case basis to design 
the pediatric studies for DDI assessment optimally.54
Physiologically-Based Pharmacokinetic (PBPK) Modeling— PBPK modeling can 
be applied to mechanistically account for the dose and patient-related factors that can impact 
DDI magnitude and variability. A PBPK model’s ability to account for the mechanistic 
underpinnings of the biological processes that determine DDI potential, especially in the 
absence of clinical data in the target population, has made this modeling approach a 
helpful tool in drug development. The number of articles that used PBPK modeling for 
U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approved drugs increased by more than tenfold 
between 2012 and 2018.60 Among a total of 136 FDA submissions between 2008 and 
2014 that applied PBPK modeling, 61% focused on addressing DDI-related questions.61,62 
However, there are a limited number of examples of using PBPK modeling for pediatric DDI 
assessment. Although a few recent reports have utilized PBPK modeling to predict an eDDI 
in children63–66, only one article considered a target population below two years of age.65 
As of now, the use of PBPK modeling in pediatric regulatory submissions has primarily 
focused on initial dose-finding for clinical trials, especially in the younger children below 
two years of age.67 This could be mainly because limited pediatric DDI data are currently 
available to validate the PBPK model predictions, with almost no DDI data available in Gonzalez and Sinha Page 12
J Clin Pharmacol . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 June 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscriptneonates and infants4, where maximum variation in the magnitude of DDI could be expected 
(compared to adults). Therefore, there is a clear knowledge gap in the application of PBPK 
modeling for pediatric DDI assessment, particularly below two years of age.
When applying PBPK modeling in the pediatric population, adult PBPK models are first 
developed and evaluated for the victim and perpetrator drugs. If adult DDI data are 
available, a joint DDI model can be implemented and evaluated.4 These adult PBPK 
models are then extrapolated to the pediatric population by accounting for age-dependent 
physiological changes such as organ size, composition, perfusion, and function. Such age­
dependent changes are already implemented in virtual pediatric populations available within 
software platforms such as Simcyp® and PK-Sim®. The pediatric PBPK models for the 
perpetrator and victim drugs can then be evaluated separately using available clinical data. 
However, pediatric PBPK model evaluation can be challenging due to the presence of 
other confounding factors that affect PK, including disease-mediated factors (e.g., organ 
impairment, critical illness) and/or co-medications. Accounting for these disease-mediated 
changes in the virtual pediatric population can be challenging due to gaps in knowledge 
and heterogeneity in disease status between patients. In these circumstances, it is essential 
to have confidence in the algorithms that define the age-dependent changes in the “rate­
limiting” physiological variables to ensure an appropriate joint DDI model is developed. 
More specifically, in the context of DDI evaluation, essential rate-limiting variable(s) are 
the ontogeny of enzyme and transporter expression(s) that define the age-dependent change 
in fe,  dose of the perturbed pathway(s) in the victim drug’s model. Scientists working at 
the FDA have identified ontogeny as the key area where confidence needs to be built 
in order to make “untested” predictions of DDI in children below two years of age.67 
Additionally, the polymorphic drug-metabolizing enzymes and transporters can also be 
a rate-limiting variable influencing fe,  dose if multiple metabolic/transport processes are 
involved. Extensive research has already been performed to facilitate PBPK modeling for the 
pediatric population. Various ontogeny equations for enzyme expressions have already been 
developed, and some of them are already implemented in commercial PBPK software.68–72 
Apart from drug-metabolizing enzymes, there has also been progress in elucidating the 
impact of ontogeny in drug transporters that can impact drug disposition.73,74 Therefore, 
there is an opportunity to apply PBPK modeling to evaluate both drug-metabolizing 
enzyme- and transporter-mediated DDIs in the future.
Model Simulations— Developed PopPK and PBPK models can be used to evaluate the 
DDI magnitude in different untested scenarios using a simulation-based approach. The 
simulations can assess DDI magnitude differences as a function of age, dose, and genetic 
variation if these variables are accounted for in the PopPK or PBPK model. The simulations 
can inform dose adjustments based on the predicted change in the measure(s) of exposure 
as a function of these variables if the drug combination is used in pediatric patients. Drug 
exposure measures that can be simulated and related to the drug’s therapeutic window 
include AUC and the maximal drug concentration. As described in the FDA guidance, a 
no-effect boundary needs to be defined, representing the interval within which a change in 
a systemic exposure measure is considered not relevant to warrant clinical action (e.g., dose 
or schedule adjustment, or additional therapeutic monitoring).75 For clinical DDI studies, Gonzalez and Sinha Page 13
J Clin Pharmacol . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 June 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscriptno-effect boundaries can be derived for the substrate drug based on available information 
about the exposure and exposure-response relationships.75 In the absence of information 
that can help define these no-effect boundaries, standard bio-equivalence criteria can be 
followed. As per the criteria, the 90% confidence interval for the exposure measure’s 
geometric mean ratio (in the presence and absence of the interaction) should fall within 
the range of 80–125% to be considered a clinically insignificant DDI. A 90% confidence 
interval for the exposure measure’s geometric mean ratio can be generated separately for 
each pediatric age group studied in pediatric DDI evaluation.
Summary of Pediatric DDI Evaluation, Knowledge Gaps, and Areas for Future Research
A DDI magnitude estimated in adults may not be directly applicable to pediatric patients 
under various circumstances discussed in this article. However, given that pediatric studies 
often employ an opportunistic study design, estimation of the DDI magnitude in pediatric 
age groups is challenging. Selection of an appropriate modeling approach is needed and 
should depend upon the availability and/or informativeness of clinical DDI data. When 
robust pediatric DDI data are available (i.e., adequate sample size and sampling scheme), a 
top-down analysis that uses population modeling can be applied since it has the unique 
ability to estimate the PK and PD parameters from opportunistic datasets. Population 
modeling can also help to discern the effect of concomitant medication(s) on the inter­
individual variability in drug disposition or response. The use of population modeling for 
pediatric DDI evaluation is mainly limited by small sample sizes and scarcity of information 
about co-medications (i.e., dose levels, perpetrator drug PK data). On the other hand, PBPK 
modeling holds great promise for pediatric DDI evaluation, particularly when clinical DDI 
data are unavailable (or are less informative). PBPK modeling can be applied to make PK 
predictions by integrating available drug and physiological data of the target population 
and accounting for study design variables. As summarized in Figure 2, population and 
PBPK modeling approaches each have strengths and limitations, and both will play a role in 
pediatric DDI evaluation.
Collaborative research is needed to facilitate pediatric DDI evaluation in the future. 
This can include characterizing patient-related variables’ (e.g., obesity, organ dysfunction, 
genetic variation) impact on DDI magnitude; the development and refinement of virtual 
pediatric patient population libraries; continued research into the maturation of enzyme 
and transporter proteins; and pediatric DDI data collection for model development and 
evaluation. PBPK modeling predictions require virtual patient population libraries of 
physiological variables for the target population that account for the inter-individual 
variability in PK. These virtual patient population libraries should account for physiological 
changes that mimic different real-world patient populations, such as pediatric patients with 
obesity, organ dysfunction, and critical illness. When comparing PBPK model predictions 
with real-world patient data, model evaluation can be challenging if these patient-related 
variables are not captured. Therefore, continued development and refinement of virtual 
patient population libraries is needed for PBPK model evaluation purposes.
Additional potential areas for research include identifying elimination pathways and/or 
combination of elimination pathways that may be particularly susceptible to DDIs in Gonzalez and Sinha Page 14
J Clin Pharmacol . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 June 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscriptpediatric patients; identifying ideal clinical substrates, inhibitors, and inducers (that are 
routinely administered per standard of care in pediatric patients) to validate DDIs associated 
with these elimination pathways; and more examples demonstrating the use of opportunistic 
and electronic health cord data for pediatric DDI evaluation. Also, much more research 
is needed to characterize PD-mediated DDIs in pediatric patients, including applying 
methodologies that have been used to assess PD-mediated DDIs in adults.35,76–79 Finally, 
the potential ontogeny of pharmacological targets and its impact on PD-mediated DDIs 
has remained unexplored to the authors’ knowledge. Initiatives to facilitate collaboration 
between drug developers, academic researchers, and regulatory agencies can help expedite 
the research in these unmet areas of pediatric DDI evaluation.
Source of Funding
D.G. was supported by the Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human Development 
(NICHD) under awards 5R01HD096435-03 and 1R01HD102949-01A1. J.S. was supported by the NICHD under 
award 5R01HD096435-03. The content is solely the responsibility of the authors and does not necessarily represent 
the official views of the National Institutes of Health.
References
1. Cascorbi I Drug interactions—principles, examples and clinical consequences. Dtsch. Arztebl. Int. 
2012;109(33–34):546–55. [PubMed: 23152742] 
2. van den Berg JP, et al. Pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic interactions in anaesthesia. A review 
of current knowledge and how it can be used to optimize anaesthetic drug administration. Br. J. 
Anaesth. 2017;118(1):44–57. [PubMed: 28039241] 
3. Hull MW, Montaner JSG. Ritonavir-boosted protease inhibitors in HIV therapy. Ann. Med. 
2011;43(5):375–88. [PubMed: 21501034] 
4. Salerno SN, Burckart GJ, Huang SM, Gonzalez D. Pediatric drug–drug interaction studies: barriers 
and opportunities. Clin Pharmacol Ther. 2019;105(5):1067–1070. [PubMed: 30362111] 
5. Feinstein J, Dai D, Zhong W, Freedman J, Feudtner C. Potential drug-drug interactions in infant, 
child, and adolescent patients in children’s hospitals. Pediatrics. 2015;135(1):e99–108. [PubMed: 
25511114] 
6. Dai D, Feinstein JA, Morrison W, Zuppa AF, Feudtner C. Epidemiology of polypharmacy and 
potential drug-drug interactions among pediatric patients in ICUs of U.S. children’s hospitals. 
Pediatr Crit Care Med. 2016;17(5):e218–28. [PubMed: 26959349] 
7. Feinstein JA, Feudtner C, Valuck R, Kempe A. The depth, duration, and degree of outpatient 
pediatric polypharmacy in Colorado fee-for-service Medicaid patients. Pharmacoepidemiol. Drug 
Saf. 2015;24(10):1049–1057. [PubMed: 26248529] 
8. Holm J, Eiermann B, Kimland E, Mannheimer B. Prevalence of potential drug-drug interactions in 
Swedish pediatric outpatients. PLoS One 2019;14(8):e0220685. [PubMed: 31381591] 
9. Balk TE, et al. Drug–drug interactions in pediatric oncology patients. Pediatr. Blood Cancer 
2017;64(7): e26410.
10. Yeh ML, et al. Potential drug-drug interactions in pediatric outpatient prescriptions for newborns 
and infants. Comput. Methods Programs Biomed. 2014;113(1): 15–22. [PubMed: 24209715] 
11. U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Code of Federal Regulations, Title 21, Part 50, 
Subpart D, (2013), §50.52. Accessed via: https://www.accessdata.fda.gov/scripts/cdrh/cfdocs/cfcfr/
CFRSearch.cfm?fr=50.52 .
12. Salem F, Rostami-Hodjegan A, Johnson TN. Do children have the same vulnerability to metabolic 
drug-drug interactions as adults? A critical analysis of the literature. J Clin Pharmacol. 2013;53(5): 
559–66. [PubMed: 23724424] Gonzalez and Sinha Page 15
J Clin Pharmacol . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 June 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript13. Tesfaye ZT, Nedi T. Potential drug–drug interactions in inpatients treated at the internal medicine 
ward of Tikur anbessa specialized hospital. Drug. Healthc. Patient Saf. 2017;9: 71–76. [PubMed: 
28860861] 
14. Grissinger M Analysis of reported drug interactions: a recipe for harm to patients. Pennsylvania 
patient Saf. Advis. 2016;13(4):137–148.
15. Magro L, Moretti U, Leone R. Epidemiology and characteristics of adverse drug reactions caused 
by drugdrug interactions. Expert Opin. Drug Saf. 2012;11(1):83–94. [PubMed: 22022824] 
16. Palleria C, et al. Pharmacokinetic drug-drug interaction and their implication in clinical 
management. J. Res. Med. Sci. 2013;18(7):601–610. [PubMed: 24516494] 
17. Patsalos PN, et al. Antiepileptic drugs -- best practice guidelines for therapeutic drug monitoring: 
A position paper by the subcommission on therapeutic drug monitoring, ILAE Commission on 
Therapeutic Strategies. Epilepsia 2008;49(7):1239–76. [PubMed: 18397299] 
18. van Dijkman SC, Wicha SG, Danhof M, Della Pasqua OE. Individualized dosing algorithms 
and therapeutic monitoring for antiepileptic drugs. Clin. Pharmacol. Ther. 2018;103(4):663–673. 
[PubMed: 28653352] 
19. Obach RS, Walsky RL, Venkatakrishnan K, Houston JB, Tremaine LM. In vitro cytochrome P450 
inhibition data and the prediction of drug-drug interactions: Qualitative relationships, quantitative 
predictions, and the rank-order approach. Clin. Pharmacol. Ther. 2005;78(6): 582–592. [PubMed: 
16338274] 
20. Rostami-Hodjegan A, Tucker G. ‘In silico’ simulations to assess the ‘in vivo’ consequences of ‘in 
vitro’ metabolic drug-drug interactions. Drug Discov. Today Technol. 2004;1(4):441–8. [PubMed: 
24981625] 
21. Rowland M, Matin SB. Kinetics of drug-drug interactions. J. Pharmacokinet. Biopharm. 1973;1(6): 
553–567.
22. Salem F, Johnson TN, Barter ZE, Leeder JS, Rostami-Hodjegan A. Age related changes in 
fractional elimination pathways for drugs: assessing the impact of variable ontogeny on metabolic 
drug-drug interactions. J Clin Pharmacol. 2013;53(8):857–865. [PubMed: 23720017] 
23. Strougo A, Yassen A, Monnereau C, Danhof M, Freijer J. Predicting the ‘first dose in children’ 
of CYP3A-metabolized drugs: evaluation of scaling approaches and insights into the CYP3A7­
CYP3A4 switch at young ages. J. Clin. Pharmacol. 2014;54(9):1006–15. [PubMed: 24676942] 
24. Rhodin MM, et al. Human renal function maturation: a quantitative description using weight and 
postmenstrual age. Pediatr. Nephrol. 2009;24(1): 67–76. [PubMed: 18846389] 
25. Salem F, Johnson TN, Hodgkinson ABJ, Ogungbenro K, Rostami-Hodjegan A. Does “birth” as an 
event impact maturation trajectory of renal clearance via glomerular filtration? Reexamining data 
in preterm and full-term neonates by avoiding the creatinine bias. J. Clin. Pharmacol. 2021;61(2): 
159–171. [PubMed: 32885464] 
26. Salem F, Abduljalil K, Kamiyama Y , Rostami-Hodjegan A. Considering age variation when 
coining drugs as high vs low hepatic extraction ratio. Drug Metab. Dispos. 2016;44(7):1099–1102. 
[PubMed: 26864786] 
27. Boonsathorn S, et al. Clinical pharmacokinetics and dose recommendations for posaconazole in 
infants and children. Clin. Pharmacokinet. 2019;58(1): 53–61. [PubMed: 29679234] 
28. Ogawa R & Echizen H. Drug-drug interaction profiles of proton pump inhibitors. Clin. 
Pharmacokinet. 2010;49(8):509–33. [PubMed: 20608754] 
29. Nagita A, et al. Diurnal variation in intragastric pH in children with and without peptic ulcers. 
Pediatr. Res. 1996;40(4): 528–532. [PubMed: 8888278] 
30. Mordel A, Halkin H, Zulty L, Almog S, Ezra D. Quinidine enhances digitalis toxicity 
at therapeutic serum digoxin levels. Clin. Pharmacol. Ther. 1993;53(4): 457–462. [PubMed: 
8477562] 
31. Lin JH. Drug-drug interaction mediated by inhibition and induction of P-glycoprotein. Adv. Drug 
Deliv. Rev. 2003;55(1): 53–81. [PubMed: 12535574] 
32. Verschraagen M, Koks CHW, Schellens JHM, Beijnen JH. P-glycoprotein system as a determinant 
of drug interactions: The case of digoxin-verapamil. Pharmacol. Res. 1999;40(4): 301–306. 
[PubMed: 10527640] Gonzalez and Sinha Page 16
J Clin Pharmacol . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 June 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript33. Greiner B, et al. The role of intestinal P-glycoprotein in the interaction of digoxin and rifampin. J. 
Clin. Invest. 1999;104(2): 147–153. [PubMed: 10411543] 
34. Khaliq Y , Gallicano K, Venance S, Kravcik S, Cameron DW. Effect of ketoconazole on ritonavir 
and saquinavir concentrations in plasma and cerebrospinal fluid from patients infected with human 
immunodeficiency virus. Clin. Pharmacol. Ther. 2000; 68(6): 637–646. [PubMed: 11180024] 
35. Minto CF, Schnider TW, Short TG, Gregg KM, Gentilini A, Shafer SL. Response surface model 
for anesthetic drug interactions. Anesthesiology 2000;92(6):1603–16. [PubMed: 10839909] 
36. Stephenson RP. A modification of receptor theory. Br. J. Pharmacol. 1956;11(4):379–93.
37. Ruffolo RR Jr. Important concepts of receptor theory. J. Auton. Pharmacol. 1982;2(4):277–95. 
[PubMed: 7161296] 
38. Maehle A-H, Prüll C-R, Halliwell RF. The emergence of the drug receptor theory. Nat Rev Drug 
Discov. 2002;1(8):637–41. [PubMed: 12402503] 
39. Daws LC, Gould GG. Ontogeny and regulation of the serotonin transporter: providing insights into 
human disorders. Pharmacol Ther. 2011;131(1):61–79. [PubMed: 21447358] 
40. Samardzic J, Allegaert K, Bajcetic M. Developmental pharmacology: A moving target. Int. J. 
Pharm. 2015;492(1–2):335–7. [PubMed: 25959118] 
41. Groll AH, et al. Drug-drug interactions between triazole antifungal agents used to treat invasive 
aspergillosis and immunosuppressants metabolized by cytochrome P450 3A4. Transpl. Infect. Dis. 
2017;19(5).
42. Lipp H-P. Posaconazole: clinical pharmacokinetics and drug interactions. Mycoses 2011;54 Suppl 
1:32–8. [PubMed: 21126270] 
43. Di Nardo M, Wildschut ED. Drugs pharmacokinetics during veno-venous extracorporeal 
membrane oxygenation in pediatrics. J. Thorac. Dis. 2018;10(Suppl 5):S642–S652. [PubMed: 
29732182] 
44. Merrell MD, Cherrington NJ. Drug metabolism alterations in nonalcoholic fatty liver disease. Drug 
Metab. Rev. 2011;43(3):317–34. [PubMed: 21612324] 
45. Ghobadi C, et al. Application of a systems approach to the bottom-up assessment of 
pharmacokinetics in obese patients: expected variations in clearance. Clin. Pharmacokinet. 
2011;50(12):809–22. [PubMed: 22087867] 
46. Greenblatt DJ, Harmatz JS, Ryan MJ, Chow CR. Sustained impairment of lurasidone clearance 
after discontinuation of posaconazole: impact of obesity, and implications for patient safety. J. 
Clin. Psychopharmacol. 2018;38(4):289–295. [PubMed: 29851709] 
47. Marceau P, et al. Liver pathology and the metabolic syndrome X in severe obesity. J. Clin. 
Endocrinol. Metab. 1999;84(5):1513–7. [PubMed: 10323371] 
48. Bellentani S, Scaglioni F, Marino M, Bedogni G. Epidemiology of non-alcoholic fatty liver 
disease. Dig. Dis. 2010;28(1):155–61. [PubMed: 20460905] 
49. Schwimmer JB, Deutsch R, Kahen T, Lavine JE, Stanley C, Behling C. Prevalence of fatty liver in 
children and adolescents. Pediatrics 2006;118(4):1388–93. [PubMed: 17015527] 
50. Marion AW, Baker AJ, Dhawan A. Fatty liver disease in children. Arch. Dis. Child. 
2004;89(7):648–52. [PubMed: 15210498] 
51. Lavine JE, Schwimmer JB. Nonalcoholic fatty liver disease in the pediatric population. Clin. Liver 
Dis. 2004;8(3):549–58. [PubMed: 15331063] 
52. Ogden CL, Carroll MD, Curtin LR, McDowell MA, Tabak CJ, Flegal KM. Prevalence of 
overweight and obesity in the United States, 1999–2004. JAMA 2006;295(13):1549–55. [PubMed: 
16595758] 
53. Sallas WM, Milosavljev S, D’Souza J, Hossain M. Pharmacokinetic drug interactions in children 
taking oxcarbazepine. Clin. Pharmacol. Ther. 2003;74(2):138–49. [PubMed: 12891224] 
54. Bonate PL, et al. Methods and strategies for assessing uncontrolled drug–drug interactions in 
population pharmacokinetic analyses: results from the International Society of Pharmacometrics 
(ISOP) Working Group. J. Pharmacokinet. Pharmacodyn. 2016;43(2):123–35. [PubMed: 
26837775] Gonzalez and Sinha Page 17
J Clin Pharmacol . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 June 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript55. Ke AB, Zamek-Gliszczynski MJ, Higgins JW, Hall SD. Itraconazole and clarithromycin 
as ketoconazole alternatives for clinical CYP3A inhibition studies. Clin. Pharmacol. Ther. 
2014;95(5):473–6. [PubMed: 24747234] 
56. Frechen S, Junge L, Saari TI. A semiphysiological population pharmacokinetic model for dynamic 
inhibition of liver and gut wall cytochrome P450 3A by voriconazole. Clin. Pharmacokinet. 
2013;52(9):763–81. [PubMed: 23653047] 
57. Lehr T, Staab A, Trommeshauser D, Schaefer HG, Kloft C. Semi-mechanistic population 
pharmacokinetic drug-drug interaction modelling of a long half-life substrate and itraconazole. 
Clin Pharmacokinet. 2010;49(1):53–66. [PubMed: 20000889] 
58. Yang S, Beerahee M. Power estimation using a population pharmacokinetics model with optimal 
design by clinical trial simulations: application in pharmacokinetic drug-drug interaction studies. 
Eur. J. Clin. Pharmacol. 2011;67(3):225–33. [PubMed: 21125264] 
59. Wang DD, et al. The utility of a population approach in drug-drug interaction assessments: a 
simulation evaluation. J. Clin. Pharmacol. 2017;57(10):1268–1278. [PubMed: 28513856] 
60. Perry C, Davis G, Conner TM, Zhang T. Utilization of physiologically based pharmacokinetic 
modeling in clinical pharmacology and therapeutics: an overview. Curr. Pharmacol. Reports 2020 
5 12;1–14. [Epub ahead of print].
61. Grillo JA. Presentation title: Pediatric applications of PBPK modeling and simulation 
in drug regulatory science: where are we now?, In: AAPS Meeting. San Diego, USA. 
2014. Accessed via: https://zerista.s3.amazonaws.com/item_files/1f71/attachments/32090/original/
186.pdf . Accessed 21 Mar 2021.
62. Huang S-M, Abernethy DR, Wang Y , Zhao P, Zineh I. The utility of modeling and simulation 
in drug development and regulatory review. J. Pharm. Sci. 2013;102(9): 2912–2923. [PubMed: 
23712632] 
63. Li A, Yeo K, Welty D, Rong H. Development of guanfacine extended-release dosing strategies 
in children and adolescents with ADHD using a physiologically based pharmacokinetic model 
to predict drug–drug interactions with moderate CYP3A4 inhibitors or inducers. Pediatr. Drugs 
2018;20(2):205.
64. Adiwidjaja J, Boddy A V , McLachlan AJ. Implementation of a physiologically based 
pharmacokinetic modeling approach to guide optimal dosing regimens for imatinib and potential 
drug interactions in paediatrics. Front. Pharmacol. 2020;10:1672. [PubMed: 32082165] 
65. Salerno SN, et al. Physiologically-based pharmacokinetic modeling characterizes the CYP3A­
mediated drug-drug interaction between fluconazole and sildenafil in infants. Clin. Pharmacol. 
Ther. 2021;109(1): 253–262. [PubMed: 32691891] 
66. Huang W, Nakano M, Sager J, Ragueneau-Majlessi I, Isoherrane N. Physiologically based 
pharmacokinetic model of the CYP2D6 probe atomoxetine: extrapolation to special populations 
and drug-drug interactions. Drug Metab. Dispos. 2017;45(11):1156–1165. [PubMed: 28860113] 
67. Grimstein M, et al. Physiologically based pharmacokinetic modeling in regulatory science: an 
update from the U.S. Food and Drug Administration’s Office of Clinical Pharmacology. J. Pharm. 
Sci. 2019;108(1):21–25. [PubMed: 30385284] 
68. Edginton AN, Schmitt W, V oith B, Willmann S. A mechanistic approach for the scaling of 
clearance in children. Clin. Pharmacokinet. 2006;45(7):683–704. [PubMed: 16802850] 
69. Johnson TN, Rostami-Hodjegan A, Tucker GT. Prediction of the clearance of eleven drugs and 
associated variability in neonates, infants and children. Clin. Pharmacokinet. 2006;45(9):931–56. 
[PubMed: 16928154] 
70. Upreti VV , Wahlstrom JL. Meta-analysis of hepatic cytochrome P450 ontogeny to underwrite the 
prediction of pediatric pharmacokinetics using physiologically based pharmacokinetic modeling. J. 
Clin. Pharmacol. 2016;56(3):266–83. [PubMed: 26139104] 
71. de Wildt SN, Kearns GL, Leeder JS, van den Anker JN. Glucuronidation in humans. 
Pharmacogenetic and developmental aspects. Clin. Pharmacokinet. 1999;36(6):439–52. [PubMed: 
10427468] 
72. Verscheijden LFM, Koenderink JB, Johnson TN, de Wildt SN, Russel FGM. Physiologically­
based pharmacokinetic models for children: Starting to reach maturation? Pharmacol. Ther. 
2020;211:107541. [PubMed: 32246949] Gonzalez and Sinha Page 18
J Clin Pharmacol . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 June 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript73. Cheung KWK, van Groen BD, Burckart GJ, Zhang L, de Wildt SN, Huang S-M. Incorporating 
ontogeny in physiologically based pharmacokinetic modeling to improve pediatric drug 
development: what we know about developmental changes in membrane transporters. J Clin 
Pharmacol. 2019;59 (Suppl 1):S56–S69. [PubMed: 31502692] 
74. van Groen BD, Tibboel D, deWildt SN. Innovative approaches and recent advances in the study 
of ontogeny of drug metabolism and transport. Br. J. Clin. Pharmacol. 2020 8 26. [Epub ahead of 
print].
75. U.S. Food and Drug Administration Center for Drug Evaluation and Research. Clinical 
drug interaction studies-cytochrome P450 enzyme- and transporter-mediated drug interactions. 
Guidance for industry. Accessvia via: https://www.fda.gov/media/134581/download . (2020). 
Accessed 23 Dec 2020.
76. Danhof M, de Jongh J, De Lange ECM, Della Pasqua O, Ploeger BA, V oskuyl RA. Mechanism­
based pharmacokinetic-pharmacodynamic modeling: biophase distribution, receptor theory, and 
dynamical systems analysis. Annu. Rev. Pharmacol. Toxicol. 2007;47:357–400. [PubMed: 
17067280] 
77. Jonker DM, Visser SAG, van der Graaf PH, V oskuyl RA, Danhof M. Towards a mechanism-based 
analysis of pharmacodynamic drug-drug interactions in vivo. Pharmacol. Ther. 2005;106(1):1–18. 
[PubMed: 15781119] 
78. Wicha SG, Chen C, Clewe O, Simonsson USH. A general pharmacodynamic interaction model 
identifies perpetrators and victims in drug interactions. Nat. Commun. 2017 14;8(1):2129. 
[PubMed: 29242552] 
79. Kern S, Xie G, White J, Egan T. A response surface analysis of propofol-remifentanil 
pharmacodynamic interaction in volunteers. Anesthesiology 2004;100(6):1373–81. [PubMed: 
15166554] Gonzalez and Sinha Page 19
J Clin Pharmacol . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 June 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author ManuscriptFigure 1. 
Essential considerations for the evaluation of pediatric drug-drug interactions (DDIs). The 
drug, patient population, study design, and data analysis considerations are summarized 
within separate light blue boxes. The study design and data analysis categories collectively 
represent the methodological considerations. The considerations outlined within the dark 
blue boxes are common to the corresponding categories in the light blue boxes. PK, 
pharmacokinetic; PBPK, physiologically based pharmacokinetic.Gonzalez and Sinha Page 20
J Clin Pharmacol . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 June 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author ManuscriptFigure 2. 
Challenges and opportunities for applying physiologically based pharmacokinetic (PBPK) 
and population pharmacokinetic (PopPK) modeling in pediatric drug-drug interaction (DDI) 
evaluations.Gonzalez and Sinha Page 21
J Clin Pharmacol . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 June 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author ManuscriptAuthor Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author ManuscriptGonzalez and Sinha Page 22
Table 1.
Comparison of the key attributes between adult and pediatric drug-drug interaction (DDI) evaluation and their 
implications in pediatric DDI assessment.
Adults Pediatric Patients Implications for Pediatric DDI Assessment
Study subjects Healthy volunteersPatients receiving the 
drugs as part of their 
treatment regimenPotential confounding effects of disease states and co­
medications may be observed.
Study designProspective (crossover or 
parallel, two-arm study 
design)Prospective, 
retrospective, or case 
reportsFindings may be limited by the study design variables in 
retrospective studies (e.g., limited dose and age range, the 
limited sample size for each age or dose group).
Physiological 
changes with ageGenerally, not a 
significant factor for 
healthy volunteersPresent throughout 
childhoodAge-dependent physiological changes may confound the DDI 
magnitude if the age effect is not captured (most relevant for <2 
years of age due to possible alteration of fe,dose ).
PK data analysis 
approachNon-compartmental 
analysis, Population PK, 
or PBPKPopulation or PBPK 
modelingStudy design variables (e.g., sample size, perpetrator’s PK data, 
or dose range) should guide population modeling methodology 
(e.g., categorical vs. continuous covariate modeling). PBPK 
modeling is an alternative approach when clinical DDI data are 
unavailable or less informative.
PK sampling Intensive SparseSparse sampling makes it challenging to apply a non­
compartmental analysis approach.
PK: pharmacokinetic; PBPK: physiologically-based pharmacokinetic; fe,dose : fraction of dose of the victim drug eliminated by the perpetrated 
elimination pathway.
J Clin Pharmacol . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 June 01.