Journal of Cystic Fibrosis 21 (2022) e5–e7 
Contents  lists available  at ScienceDirect  
Journal  of Cystic  Fibrosis  
journal  homepage:  www.elsevier.com/locate/jcf  
Case Report  
No drug-drug  interaction  between  tezacaf  tor-ivacaf  tor and 
clofazimine:  A case  report  
S.E.M.  Vonk  a , S.W.J.  Terheggen-Lagro  b , L.M. Mouissie  c , R.A .A . Mathôt  a , E.M. Kemper  a , on 
behalf  of the Amsterdam  Mucociliary  Clearance  Disease  (AMCD)  research  group  ∗
a Department  of Hospital Pharmacy,  Amsterdam  University  Medical Centers, location AMC, the Netherlands  
b Department  of Pediatric Respiratory  Medicine,  Amsterdam  University  Medical Centers, location AMC, the Netherlands  
c Patient with Cystic Fibrosis under treatment  at CF-center  Amsterdam,  the Netherlands  
a r t i c l e i n f o 
Article history: 
Received  21 July 2021 
Revised 29 September  2021 
Accepted  11 October 2021 
Available  online 29 October 2021 
Keywords:  
Tezacaftor-ivacaftor  
Clofazimine  
Drug-drug  interaction  a b s t r a c t 
In this case report the potential  drug-drug  interaction  between  cytochrome  P450 (CYP) 3A4 substrates  
tezacaftor-ivacaftor  and CYP3A4/5  inhibitor  clofazimine  is investigated  in a patient with cystic ﬁbrosis.  
Exposure  to tezacaftor,  ivacaftor  and its metabolites  was assessed  by determination  of the area under 
the plasma concentration  versus time curve (AUC 0-24 h for tezacaftor  and AUC 0-12 h for ivacaftor  and its 
metabolite)  before start of clofazimine  and 8 and 115 days after start of clofazimine.  The AUC-ratio  at day 
115 and pre-start  was 1.09, 1.45 and 0.747 for ivacaftor,  hydroxymethyl  ivacaftor  and tezacaftor,  respec- 
tively. This case suggests  that clofazimine  exhibits  no clinically  relevant  increase  in exposure  to tezacaftor  
and ivacaftor.  
© 2021 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of European Cystic Fibrosis Society.  
This is an open access article under the CC BY license ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/  ) 
1. Introduction  
Clofazimine  is an antimycobacterial  drug which is used for the 
treatment  of non-tuberculous  mycobacterium  (NTM).  In August  
2019 clofazimine  got a positive  opinion  for orphan  designation  for 
the treatment  of NTM lung disease  by the European  Medicines  
Agency.  In vitro clofazimine  has been characterized  as an inhibitor  
of cytochrome  P450 (CYP)3A4/5,  2C8 and 2D6. In previously  per- 
formed  static and physiologically  based pharmacokinetic  (PBPK) 
modeling  prediction  studies  an interaction  between  clofazimine  
and midazolam,  a probe substrate  for CYP3A4,  was characterized.  
Midazolam  area under the plasma  concentration  versus time curve 
(AUC) was increased  with a factor 5.59 and 2.69 for static and 
PBPK modeling,  respectively,  when coadministered  with 100 mg 
clofazimine  [1] . At the moment  of writing  this report there are 
limited  in vivo data available  describing  the interaction  proﬁle of 
clofazimine  [2] . 
Tezacaftor-ivacaftor,  a combination  drug for the treatment  of CF, 
are both substrates  of CYP3A4  and CYP3A5.  In the prescribing  in- 
formation  of tezacaftor-ivacaftor  dose reductions  are recommended  
when patients  are starting  with a moderate  to strong inhibitor  of 
∗Corresponding  author at: PharmD,  PhD Amsterdam  University  Medical Centers, 
location AMC, Department  of Pharmacy,  Meibergdreef  9, 1105 AZ Amsterdam,  the 
Netherlands.  
E-mail address: e.m.kemper@amsterdamumc.nl  (E.M. Kemper).  CYP3A4  [3] . Based on these data an increase  in AUC of tezacaftor-  
ivacaftor  after initiation  with clofazimine  was expected.  
In this case study the interaction  between  tezacaftor-ivacaftor  
and clofazimine  was evaluated  in a patient  with CF. 
2. Case report 
A 16-year-old  girl with cystic ﬁbrosis  (CF) was initiated  on 
clofazimine  100 mg once daily for approximately  one year, as 
part of a quadruple  therapy  regimen  including  also ethambutol,  
azithromycin  and amikacin  to treat NTM. As chronic  CF medication  
tezacaftor-ivacaftor  was used in a regular  dose of 100-150  mg, re- 
spectively,  once daily in the morning,  combined  with ivacaftor  150 
mg monotherapy  once daily in the evening.  Her medication  pro- 
ﬁle was thoroughly  screened  before start of the NTM medication  
on drug-drug  interactions.  Since there were no in vivo data avail- 
able describing  the potential  drug-drug  interaction  between  clo- 
fazimine  and CYP3A4  substrates,  no immediate  dose adjustments  
in tezacaftor-ivacaftor  were made at the start of clofazimine.  The 
patient  was admitted  to the hospital  before the initiation  of her 
NTM treatment.  Blood samples  were taken just before administra-  
tion of tezacaftor-ivacaftor  (time = 0) and 2, 4 and 6 h after ad- 
ministration.  Similar  PK curves were obtained  at 8 and 115 days af- 
ter start of clofazimine.  Ivacaftor,  hydroxymethyl  ivacaftor,  ivacaftor  
carboxylate  and tezacaftor  were quantiﬁed  in plasma  with a val- 
idated liquid chromatography-tandem  mass spectrometry  method  
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcf.2021.10.003  
1569-1993/© 2021 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of European Cystic Fibrosis Society. This is an open access article under the CC B Yl i c e n s e  
( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/  ) S.E.M. Vonk, S.W.J. Terheggen-Lagro,  L.M. Mouissie et al. Journal of Cystic Fibrosis 21 (2022) e5–e7 
Table 1 
Area under the curve (AUC) of ivacaftor,  hydroxymethyl  ivacaftor,  ivacaftor  carboxylate  and tezacaftor  before start 
of clofazimine  (day 0), and at day 8 and day 115 after start of clofazimine.  
Day 0 Day 8 Day 115 
AUC ^ (mg ∗h/L) AUC ^ (mg ∗h/L) AUC-ratio  ∗AUC ^ (mg ∗h/L) AUC-ratio  ∗
Ivacaftor  11.1 16.2 1.46 12.2 1.09 
Hydroxymethyl  ivacaftor  19.6 33.1 1.69 28.5 1.45 
Ivacaftor  carboxylate  # 8.56 14.4 1.68 22.3 2.61 
Tezacaftor  75.4 75.5 1.00 56.3 0.747 
∗AUC-ratio  = AUC after start clofazimine (day 8 or 115) /AUC before start clofazimine (day 0) 
^ AUC 0-24h for tezacaftor  by a dose of 100 mg once daily, and AUC 0-12h for ivacaftor  and its metabolites  by a dose of 
150 mg twice daily. 
# ivacaftor  carboxylate  is a non-active  metabolite  of ivacaftor  
[4] . AUC 0-24h for tezacaftor  and AUC 0-12h for ivacaftor  were deter- 
mined by the linear-log  trapezoidal  method.  At day 8, the AUC- 
ratio (AUC(day  8)/AUC(day  0)) was 1.46, 1.69, 1.68 and 1.00 for 
ivacaftor,  hydroxymethyl  ivacaftor,  ivacaftor  carboxylate  and teza- 
caftor, respectively.  The AUC-ratio  at day 115 was 1.09, 1.45, 2.61 
and 0.747 for ivacaftor,  hydroxymethyl  ivacaftor,  ivacaftor  carboxy-  
late and tezacaftor,  respectively  ( Table 1 ). No tezacaftor-ivacaftor  
dose adjustments  were made based on these results.  
3. Discussion  
In this case report no clinical  signiﬁcant  increase  in exposure  of 
tezacaftor-ivacaftor  at day 8 and day 115 was seen after the start 
with clofazimine  therapy.  
In order to calculate  the AUC, blood samples  were taken just 
before administration  of tezacaftor-ivacaftor  (time = 0) and 2, 4 
and 6 h after administration.  The maximum  plasma  concentration  
(C max ) of tezacaftor  and ivacaftor  are reached  after 4 and 6 h, re- 
spectively.  Steady state plasma  concentrations  (C ss ) of tezacaftor  
and ivacaftor  are reached  within 8 days [3] . Inhibition  of CYP en- 
zymes is immediate  and is normally  dependent  on the dose of the 
inhibitory  drug. Since clofazimine  has a very long elimination  half- 
life of 25 days, C ss is reached  after approximately  3-4 months  [5] . 
Therefore,  blood samples  were not only taken at day 8, but also on 
day 115 days after start of clofazimine  when (higher)  steady-state  
levels are present.  
The observed  AUCs of ivacaftor  and tezacaftor  in this patient  
before start of clofazimine  correspond  to the AUCs reported  in the 
registration  documents.  Mean AUC (SD) at C ss in the registration  
documents  are AUC 0-24h 97.1 (35.8) mg •h/L and AUC 0-12h 11.4 (5.5) 
mg •h/L for tezacaftor  and ivacaftor,  respectively  [3] . 
Maartens  et al. studied  the effect of clofazimine  on bedaquiline  
exposure  in a group of tuberculosis  patients.  The difference  in ex- 
posure of bedaquiline  in patients  treated  with and without  clofaz- 
imine was -9.1% (90% CI -22.8 to + 7.1; p = 0.19). This study was 
however  not designed  to examine  this DDI in particular  and the 
conﬁdence  interval  of the interaction  effect were quite large, thus 
its clinical  relevance  was questioned.  However,  our ﬁndings  sup- 
port their results and in this case the patient  served as its own 
control  [2] . 
The difference  between  midazolam  and tezacaftor-ivacaftor  is 
remarkable,  since other inhibitors  of CYP3A4  do increase  its AUC. 
In the study of Sangana  et al. clofazimine  was characterized  as a 
moderate  to strong inhibitor  of CYP3A4  by in silico studies,  with 
signiﬁcant  increases  in midazolam  AUC. However,  in the study of 
Maartens  et al. in vivo no clear inhibitory  effect of clofazimine  on 
bedaquiline  exposure  was seen. Therefore  the CYP3A4  inhibiting  
potency  of clofazimine  in vivo may be questioned  and further  re- 
search is needed.  
The AUC-ratio  at day 115 and pre-start  was 1.09, 1.45 and 0.747 
for ivacaftor,  hydroxymethyl  ivacaftor  and tezacaftor,  respectively.  
These increases  are not clinically  relevant  as registration  docu- ments deﬁne a moderate  or strong inhibitor  of CYP3A4  by respec-  
tive AUC-ratios  of 3- and 16-fold  [3] . Only ivacaftor  carboxylate  
showed  an increase  in AUC-ratio  of 2.6 at day 115, but this is a 
pharmacologically  non-active  metabolite.  Therefore,  no adjustment  
in the dose of ivacaftor  was made. 
The AUC-ratio  of ivacaftor  metabolites  increased  after introduc-  
tion of clofazimine.  This was remarkable,  since the opposite  was 
expected  when inhibiting  the metabolism  of ivacaftor.  This phe- 
nomenon  can possibly  be explained  by a lower clearance  or inhib- 
ited metabolism  of the metabolites.  On the other hand, the reduc- 
tion of tezacaftor  with an AUC-ratio  of 0.747 was also the opposite  
from expected  when inhibiting  the metabolism  of tezacaftor.  This 
reduction  may be the result of a reduced  bioavailability  and/or an 
increased  clearance.  
Small differences  were observed  between  the AUC-ratios  at day 
8 and 115. These differences  are clinically  not relevant  and can pos- 
sibly be explained  by intra-individual  variability  in pharmacokinet-  
ics of tezacaftor-ivacaftor.  For instance,  both compounds  are both 
poorly soluble,  lipophilic  molecules  and administration  with fat- 
containing  food increases  their AUC [3] . 
Limitations  of this case report are that the patient  was not 
genotyped  for CYP3A4,  however  the clinical  relevance  of this is 
questioned,  since the patient  served as its own control.  Secondly,  
food intake on the days of sampling  was not controlled.  The pa- 
tient was advised  to administer  tezacaftor-ivacaftor  with fat con- 
taining  food as stated in the prescribing  information  [3] , but on 
these days no restrictions  were made compared  to usual days. In 
summary,  in this case report the drug-drug  interaction  between  
tezacaftor-ivacaftor  and clofazimine  was examined  in a patient  
with CF treated  for NTM. No clinical  signiﬁcant  increase  in expo- 
sure of tezacaftor-ivacaftor  was seen after introduction  of clofaz- 
imine, and no adjustments  in the dose of tezacaftor-ivacaftor  were 
made. 
Patients  perspective  
I am a girl aged seventeen  and live in the Netherlands  in a vil- 
lage near the sea. When I was ﬁve years old I was diagnosed  with 
Cystic Fibrosis.  Last year I started  the treatment  with clofazimine  
for my NTM. I had been using tezacaftor-ivacaftor  for a while and 
I did not have any side effects.  Before the start and during the 
treatment  with clofazimine  the physicians  checked  the concentra-  
tions of tezacaftor-ivacaftor.  For this, blood had to be taken several  
times, luckily I am used to this. After the start of the treatment  
with clofazimine  I still almost had no side effects.  The only side 
effect I had is that I get a sunburn  really fast, but this also comes 
with a nice tan. After using clofazimine  for over a year I got rid of 
my NTM, and I am very happy with that. I think it is special  that I 
am the ﬁrst person  in whom this combination  has been researched  
as far as my practitioners  know, and hopefully  other practitioners  
can learn something  from this. 
e6 S.E.M. Vonk, S.W.J. Terheggen-Lagro,  L.M. Mouissie et al. Journal of Cystic Fibrosis 21 (2022) e5–e7 
Declaration  of Competing  Interest  
The authors  declare  that they have no known  competing  ﬁnan- 
cial interests  or personal  relationships  that could have appeared  to 
inﬂuence  the work reported  in this paper. 
Acknowledgements  
We would like to thank the patient  for her approval  to share 
her clinical  data and contribution  to this case report. 
References  
[1] Sangana R , Gu H , Chun DY , Einolf HJ . Evaluation  of clinical drug interaction  
potential  of clofazimine  using static and dynamic  modeling  approaches.  Drug 
Metab Dispos 2018;46(1):26–32  . [2] Maartens  G , Brill MJE , Pandie M , Svensson  EM . Pharmacokinetic  interaction  be- 
tween bedaquiline  and clofazimine  in patients with drug-resistant  tuberculosis.  
Int J Tuberc Lung Dis 2018;22(1):26–9  . 
[3] EMA. Summary  of Product Characteristics  - SYMKEVI.:  European  Medicines  
Agency; 2018. Contract No.: EMEA/H/C/004682  - II/0012/G.  
[4] Vonk SEM , van der Meer-Vos  M , Bos LDJ , Neerincx  AH , Majoor CJ , Maitland-van  
der Zee AH , et al. A quantitative  method for the analysis of ivacaftor,  hydrox- 
ymethyl ivacaftor,  ivacaftor  carboxylate,  lumacaftor,  and tezacaftor  in plasma 
and sputum using LC-MS/MS  and its clinical applicability.  Ther Drug Monit 
2020 . 
[5] Pharma N. Summary  of Product Characteristics  - CLOFAZIMINE.  https://www.  
geneesmiddeleninformatiebank.nl/nl/  : College ter Beoordeling  van Geneesmid-  
delen (CBG-MEB);  2019. 
e7 