V ol. 85 - No. 3  MiNerVa  aN estesiologica  223EDITORIAL
Drug interaction is the cornerstone 
of modern anesthesia practice
chien-Kun tiNg *
Department of a nesthesiology, taipei Veterans g eneral Hospital, National Yang-Ming University, taipei, taiwan
*corresponding author: chien-Kun ting, Department of a nesthesiology, taipei Veterans g eneral Hospital, National Yang-Ming 
University, 201 section 2 shi-Pai road, Bei- tou District, taipei, 1 1211, taiwan. e -mail: ckting2@gmail.comMinerva a nestesiologica 2019 March;85(3):223-5
Doi: 10.23736/ s0375-9393.19.13463-3© 2019 eDiZioNi MiNerVa M e D ica
online version at http://www.minervamedica.it
in the study by Weber and Prasser published 
in this issue of Minerva Anestesiologica , 60 
patients underwent elective otolaryngeal or ear 
surgery for investigating a propofol-sufentanil 
interaction model to determine the optimal con -
centration of either drug for adequate anesthesia 
and rapid recovery, by evaluating both clinical 
endpoints and electroencephalography findings.1 
they concluded that sufentanil has a dose-depen -
dent synergistic effect on the clinically observed outcomes and parameters from three depths of 
hypnosis (DoH) devices (Bispectral i ndex [B is ], 
Narcotrend index, and c aai) in patients hypno -
tized with propofol.1
anesthesiologists are required to have an 
in-depth knowledge of pharmacology;2 we use 
the synergy between hypnotics and analgesics to suppress consciousness and nociception. Un -
der general anesthesia, a set of desirable clini -
cal endpoints should be achieved, including lack of awareness, lack of movement, adequate muscle relaxation, acceptable blood pressure, 
and body homeostasis maintenance. No single 
drug is universally satisfactory for achieving 
these endpoints. For practical purposes, anes -
thesia in the modern age involves the admin -
istration of at least two drugs — an opioid and 
a sedative hypnotic.
3 th is concept of multiple 
drug use was first described by Lundy in 1926, who used the term balanced anesthesia.
4 Bal-
anced anesthesia involves the use of desirable drug combinations by reducing the required doses of individual drugs to minimize the side 
effects. cu rrently, balanced anesthesia is one of 
the most worldwide used techniques for general 
anesthesia.
Drug interactions are usually considered in 
the dose or concentration domain, and there are 
many ways to study drug interaction. t he dose–
response relation curve is based on the standard 
sigmoid e max model. i n their study, Weber and 
Prasser used the modified Observer’s Assessment 
of alertness and s edation s cale (m oaa / s )5 to 
measure the clinical endpoints and defined loss 
of responsiveness to verbal command ( lor -
verb) by the transition from m oaa /s level 3 to 
2; noxious (painful) stimulation ( lor nox), cor -
responding to m oaa /s level 0, served as the 
primary endpoint of this study. t he m oaa / s  
Scale was firstly developed to measure the level of alertness in subjects who are sedated.
5 Probit 
regression analysis was used to determine the 
dose–response relation curve for the two differ -
ent clinical endpoints.
there is experimental evidence showing that 
conscious recall of intraoperative events is only the tip of an iceberg.
6 three DoH devices were 
used in the study of Weber and Prasser to avoid 
awareness and facilitate rapid recovery. t he B is 
index was first introduced in 1992 by Aspect 
Medical systems. t he main component of the B is 
monitor is bispectral analysis, which evaluates the 
phase relations from a single channel eeg  signal 
measured from the patient’s forehead.7 although 
This document is protected by international copyright laws. No additional reproduction is authorized. It is permitted for personal use to download and save only one file and print only one copy of this Article. It is not permitted to make additional copies (either sporadically 
or systematically, either printed or electronic) of the Article for any purpose. It is not permitted to distribute the electronic copy of the article through online internet and/or intranet file sharing systems, electronic mailing or any other means which may allow access 
to the Article. The use of all or any part of the Article for any Commercial Use is not permitted. The creation of derivative works from the Article is not permitted. The production of reprints for personal or commercial use is not permitted. It is not permitted to remove, cover,  overlay, obscure, block, or change any copyright notices or terms of use which the Publisher may post on the Article. It is not permitted to frame or use framing techniques to enclose any trademark, logo, or other proprietary information of the Publisher.tiNg  D r U g  i N teractio N i N M o D er N a N est H esia  P ractice
224 MiNerVa  aN estesiologica  March 2019 Bis-guided anesthesia and etag -guided anes -
thesia may be equivalent with regard to avoidance 
of intraoperative awareness,8 Bis-guided total in -
travenous anesthesia plays an important role in re -
ducing the risk of intraoperative awareness.9, 10 in 
2000, Monitor technik produced the Narcotrend  
monitor based on the concept described by loo-
mis et al.11 The Narcotrend monitor classifies the 
state of anesthesia into five stages (A to F); they 
were further subdivided into three sub-stages by 
Kugler.12 analogous to B is , the newer versions 
of the monitor also display the index value (0 to 
100).7 The first AEP commercial monitor was in -
troduced by Danmeter in 2001. ae P-Monitor/2 
is not only based on ae P, but also analyses the 
spectral eeg  parameters.7 Different DoH devices 
have different algorisms, which leads to a differ -
ent index value; this is compatible with Weber 
and Prasser’s finding that specific devices have their own dose–response curves.
Drug interactions can be described by shifts 
in dose–response curves, where one drug influ -
ences the dose–response curve for another drug. Weber and Prasser tried to analyses drug inter -
action using dose–response curves in the three 
DoH devices. Nonlinear regression was used to 
determine the curves. t he method suggested by 
Hannam and anderson13 was applied to deter -
mine whether the interaction is synergistic or ad -
ditive. i f the curve was noted to shift to the left, 
it was considered to indicate synergy. t he other 
approach to study interaction between two drugs 
is to plot dose pairs together to form a line which 
shows a particular level of effect. t hese isoef -
fect lines are called isoboles. isobolograms can 
be easily constructed and analyzed. Numerous 
published studies have used this methodology, 
and their conclusions are comparable to those of studies using more complex methodologies; however, the limitation of isobolograms is that the result is only applicable to the effect level 
investigated. to gain a full understanding of the 
interaction between two drugs for all effect lev -
els, it is possible to overlay a series of isoboles ranging from the minimal effect to the maximal 
effect attainable ( emax).14
the response surface is a three-dimensional 
graph with two drugs ( a and B) on the horizontal 
x and y axes and the effect on the vertical z axis. the surface is based on the shift in dose-response 
curves and the isobologram; it describes effects 
for the complete set of doses for the endpoint in 
question. responses may be either continuous, 
such as B is and blood pressure, or quantal, such 
as sedation scale scores, awake/sleep, and move-
ment/immobility. t here was a breakthrough in 
response surface modeling after 2000, owing to 
not only the advancements in computing tech-
nology that made the complex calculation pos-
sible15 but also the increasing demand for precise 
anesthesia. This concept was first introduced by 
Box and Wilson,16 and was first introduced into 
the field of anesthesia by Greco et al.14 in 1995. 
the response surfaces create models of all pos -
sible combinations of two or more drugs for a given effect. Further, they characterize the entire spectrum of the drug effect, which is an impor -
tant advantage of this approach in anesthesia and 
clinical pharmacology. t his approach reduces 
the complex physiology to a few mathematical 
elements.2
Drug interaction is the cornerstone of mod -
ern anesthesia practice. Understanding the syn -
ergism, additive effects, and even antagonism 
among anesthetics, especially hypnotics and opioids, may aid in making anesthesia more effective, minimizing side effects from the use 
of a single anesthetic, and improving the safety 
of patients. on the other hand, comprehend -
ing the underlying physiological mechanisms 
regulating the depth of hypnosis, by monitor -
ing electroencephalography findings, can aid in formulating cost-effective and safer anesthetic protocols.
the study successfully addresses synergis -
tic effect of sufentanil on the hypnotic effect of propofol both in their primary and second out -
come by tci  effective site concentration (Marsh 
model). The findings provided some evidence that sufentanil could be beneficial in loss of con-sciousness of propofol, but problems with study 
design prevented the authors from fully address -
ing this issue. a comprehensiv e ex  amination of 
opioid-propofol interaction requires a different 
study design. Future studies should consider reli-able new methods such as response surface so 
that the findings can be generalized.
This document is protected by international copyright laws. No additional reproduction is authorized. It is permitted for personal use to download and save only one file and print only one copy of this Article. It is not permitted to make additional copies (either sporadically 
or systematically, either printed or electronic) of the Article for any purpose. It is not permitted to distribute the electronic copy of the article through online internet and/or intranet file sharing systems, electronic mailing or any other means which may allow access 
to the Article. The use of all or any part of the Article for any Commercial Use is not permitted. The creation of derivative works from the Article is not permitted. The production of reprints for personal or commercial use is not permitted. It is not permitted to remove, cover,  overlay, obscure, block, or change any copyright notices or terms of use which the Publisher may post on the Article. It is not permitted to frame or use framing techniques to enclose any trademark, logo, or other proprietary information of the Publisher.DrUg iNteractio N iN MoDerN a N est H esia  P ractice  ti Ng
V ol. 85 - No. 3  MiNerVa  aN estesiologica  225ac, selvidge J a, et al.  anesthesia awareness and the bispec -
tral index. N engl J Med 2008;358:1097–108.  
9. Punjasawadwong Y , Phongchiewboon a , Bunchungmon -
gkol N. Bispectral index for improving anaesthetic delivery 
and postoperative recovery. cochrane Database syst rev 
2014;(6): cD003843.
10. Punjasawadwong Y , Boonjeungmonkol N, Phongchiew -
boon a . Bispectral index for improving anaesthetic delivery 
and postoperative recovery. cochrane Database syst rev 
2007;(4): cD003843.
11. loomis al , Harvey e N, Hobart ga . c erebral states dur -
ing sleep as studied by human brain potentials. J exp Psychol 
1937;21:127–44.  
12. Kugler J. elektroenzephalographie in klinik und praxis. 
stuttgart: thieme; 1981.
13. Hannam J a, a nderson BJ. Pharmacodynamic interaction 
models in pediatric anesthesia. Paediatr a naesth 2015;25:970–80.  
14. greco W r, Bravo g , Parsons J c . t he search for synergy: 
a critical review from a response surface perspective. Pharma -
col rev 1995;47:331–85.
15. liou JY , tsou MY , ting c K. r esponse surface models 
in the field of anesthesia: A crash course. Acta Anaesthesiol 
taiwan 2015;53:139–45.  
16. Box ge, Wilson KB. on the experimental attainment of opti -
mum conditions. J r stat soc series B stat Methodol 1951;13:1–45.References
1. Weber F, Prasser c. investigating propofol-sufentanil in -
teraction using clinical endpoints and processed electroen -
cephalography: a prospective randomized controlled trial. 
Minerva anestesiol 2019;85:271–8. 
2. shafer sl. a ll models are wrong. a nesthesiology 
2012;116:240–1.  
3. Kern se , Xie g , White J l , e gan t D. a response surface 
analysis of propofol-remifentanil pharmacodynamic interac -
tion in volunteers. a nesthesiology 2004;100:1373–81.  
4. silver s. Balanced a nesthesia. J a m Dent s oc a nesthesiol 
1959;6:11.
5. chernik D a, gillings D, laine H, Hendler J, silver 
JM, Davidson aB, et al.  Validity and reliability of the 
Observer’s Assessment of Alertness/Sedation Scale: study 
with intravenous midazolam. J clin Psychopharmacol 
1990;10:244–51.
6. schwender D, Klasing s, Daunderer M, Madler c, Pöppel 
E, Peter K. [Awareness during general anesthesia. Definition, 
incidence, clinical relevance, causes, avoidance and medico -
legal aspects]. a naesthesist 1995;44:743–54. g erman.  
7. Musizza B, ribaric s. Monitoring the depth of anaesthesia. 
sensors (Basel) 2010;10:10896–935.  
8. avidan M s , Zhang l , Burnside B a , Finkel KJ, s earleman 
Conflicts of interest.—The author certifies that there is no conflict of interest with any financial organization regarding the material discussed in the manuscript.
Comment on:
 Weber F, Prasser c . i nvestigating propofol-sufentanil interaction using clinical endpoints and processed electroenceph -
alography: a prospective randomized controlled trial. Minerva a nestesiol 2019;85:271-8. D oi : 10.23736/ s 0375-9393.18.12326-1.
Article first published online: February 13, 2019. - Manuscript accepted: February 7, 2019. - Manuscript revised: February 4, 2019. - 
Manuscript received: November 17, 2018.
(Cite this article as:  ting c K. Drug interaction is the cornerstone of modern anesthesia practice. Minerva a nestesiol 2019;85:223-5. 
Doi: 10.23736/ s0375-9393.19.13463-3)
This document is protected by international copyright laws. No additional reproduction is authorized. It is permitted for personal use to download and save only one file and print only one copy of this Article. It is not permitted to make additional copies (either sporadically 
or systematically, either printed or electronic) of the Article for any purpose. It is not permitted to distribute the electronic copy of the article through online internet and/or intranet file sharing systems, electronic mailing or any other means which may allow access 
to the Article. The use of all or any part of the Article for any Commercial Use is not permitted. The creation of derivative works from the Article is not permitted. The production of reprints for personal or commercial use is not permitted. It is not permitted to remove, cover,  overlay, obscure, block, or change any copyright notices or terms of use which the Publisher may post on the Article. It is not permitted to frame or use framing techniques to enclose any trademark, logo, or other proprietary information of the Publisher.